
0-  is it?
The Random Word Generator is
1- a tool to help you create a list of random words. There are many reasons one might be interested in doing this, and you're likely here because you're int
1- rested in creating a random word list. This tool can help you do exactly that.

The tool i
3-  easy to use. All you need to do is choose the 
3- umber of word
3-  you want to create (the def
3- ult is five, but you can input any number you'd like) and the type of words you want. You can choose fro
3-  all words, verbs only, nouns only or adject
3- ve only depending on which best meets your needs.

Once done, you simply press
5- the "Generate Random Words" button and a list of words will appear. You can use this list or you can scan them and choose the ones you want to keep by clicking on them. This will place them in the "Your Word List" area and you can build a new list that meets your needs.

Below you'll find some of the common ways this tool can be used.

Creative Writing
This tool can be a great way to generate creative writing ideas. For example, you could generate 20 random words and then incorporate all of them into a story. This will force you to think creatively since you have n
10-  idea what words will appear. You can also play with this to make it more difficult if you desire. For example, you could create the story using the 20 words in the exact order they were randomly generated to make it more of a challenge. This is one example of how writers might use the tool to push their writing.

Teachers & Students
Teachers can use this tool to help create vocabulary tests or challenging students to correctly use words in a sentence. For students, they can us
13-  it to study for spelling bees, buil
13-  their vocabulary and learn new words. Both can use it to improve creativity by using it to foster creative writing.

Games
For those who plays games like P
16- ctionary,
16- this can be a great tool to use for the game. With words being randomly generated, it keeps the game fair and honest. It can also be a fun way for kids to fill in MadLibs to produce results that the children may not have ever considered. The tool can benefit any game which may need words as part of it.

Creating Names
The generator can be an excellent way to brainstorm new names. By generating random words, the tool can
19- help spark your creativity by producing words you may not have come up with on your own when working on various projects. For example, the tool can help you come up with product names, naming a band or group, creating an event name or any other naming process where you're looking for inspiration.

The above examples are
21- just a few ways this tool can b
21-  used. If you find this tool useful, please let us know. We're always interested in learning how people use our tools. We also welcome any suggestions you might have to make it better.
Random Word Generator
This is an onli
23- e brainstorming tool I made that generates random words. Simply pick the words from the ra
23- dom list that creatively inspire you.

This list of random words will help spark your creative imagination if you're looking to think up a domain name, a band name, a project name or whatever. This tool uses thousands of handpicked random nouns and verbs to maximize the possibility of creating interesting brainstorming ideas.

Right now the randomizer generates a list of 6 random words by default but you can change that to generate a word list of anywhere from two to ten words.

For band names and business projects, I find that setting the random word chooser to pick three or four words gives you an optimal list to work with.

If you're looking to start a website, I've also created a page with creative tools that helps you create blog names.

Once you click the generate button, the random words will appear just below the button. Have fun brainstorming. Be inspired.

Word Generator
I now also have a words generator that uses other languages to c the random list for brainstorming. This page has a random word chooser for random French words and another page for random German words.
Random Generator List
Click the button below to generate 
6
 random words.

dread treed gorilla fiery agonizing homeless

Click on a word you like if you want to temporarily 
44- tore it in the box below.
Your Word List
Please note these words are not saved anywhere and will disappear when you leave this page. So if you like any of the randomly generated ideas in your list of random words then write them down somewhere.

SHARE THIS PAGE > 
Facebook
 
Twitter
 
Pinterest
More Free Tools to Check Out!
Create a List of Random Nouns
Alphabetize Text 
56- utomatically
Convert Word Doc Content to HTML Code
Convert Plain Text Content to Clean HTML
Capitalize sentences or Fix Caps Lock
A Random Numbers Generator Tool
Trying to Think up Domain Names?
Read this article if you're looking to think up some good website names for your new domain. This page also features a random word tool for brainstorming ideas.

Language Versions
Random Word Generator is also available in German (Zufallswort Generator), French (Générateur de Mots Aléatoires) and Spanish (Generador de Palabras Aleatorias).

The Most Popular Tools
Random Word Generator: Generate a list of random words. Great tool for brainstorming ideas.
Random Number Generator: Generate some random numbers in a specific number range.
Random Sentence Generator: Create random sentences for creative brainstorming.
Remove Line Breaks: Remove unwanted line breaks from your text.
Random Choice Generator: Let this tool make a random decision for you.
Convert Word to HTML: Automatically convert word contents to HTML code.
Text to HTML: Quickly change plain text into HTML paragraphs.
HTML to Text: Remove HTML tags, leaving only text content.
Alphabetical Order: Alphabetize lists, or other text content with this tool.
Capitalize the First letter of Sentences
HTML Table Generator: Generate the code for a simple HTML table.
Word Counter: Count the number of words in your text.
Convert URLs to HTML Links
Convert
81- CSV Text to HTML Table
Remove Duplicate Lines: Remove duplicate lines from a text file.
HTML Compression: Compress HTML contents into a smaller size.
Random Decision Maker: Generate a random decision with this app.
The Rules of Plural Nouns: Entertaining explanations and many plural examples
Generating Random Words: An article about how generating random words can inspire fresh new ideas
The Newest Updates
Remove HTML Tags from a String
Online Sentence Counter
Character Counter Online
Add Line Breaks Online
Title Capitalization Tool
Title and Description Letter Counter
HTML Text Generator
HTML List Generator
Reverse Text Generator
Random Password Generator
Random String Generator
Word Counter
List of Common Words
Remove Extra Whitespaces
Uppercase or Lowercase Text
Remove Duplicate Lines
Brainstorm a Website Name
Plural Noun Generator
Random Nouns Generator
Random Adjective Generator
HTML Character Encoding Tool
Rules of Capitalization in English
© 2007-2020 TextFixer.com
Follow TextFixer on Facebook
Privacy Policy
Legal Notice
Contact
About
A collection of free online web tools.
G
117- SOgqkVyCe4ihKK1m4m7Kju5uT/sh31ovPgosGXcaRnm5+EolzlegoMF+fc3ijhbw2g59KBjifQUfPpbMfivkd6Z4XqXJmepQqy5kre8OSGad3Ss5lIAUhsHLKXlFAzx8I2PZdqo3jd2hMbj42vTBt+KP3uOQjJFSHUlOVKu1bEq4xEmd/kEOUzqK/swE9MHgqOVcxKCFa95S5FM2EJywbVORSnDoyUOOQtUGa2zwj8No8qk2MmSAhvTuqcq3HX3ltT+8E2FwDgrq5pAJ2vRuLWR0gjCHUo0D7SBOe8XIu6B8jhYeY48RB7DtMK1eQDBm4nQh28u2pyJSKc5JopBQ==
RANDO
118-  WORD GENERATOR
WORD
NOUN
VERB
NAME
SENTENCE
PHRASE
NUMBER
LETTER
MORE...
ADVERTISEMENT

Random Paragraph Generator
Number of Paragraphs: 
1
Please LIKE & SHARE to keep our generators available!

Click
Like	
Her eyebrows were a shade darker than her hair. They were thick and almost horizontal, emphasizing the depth of her eyes. She was rather handsome than beautiful. Her face was captivating by reason of a certain frankness of expression and a contradictory subtle play of features. Her manner was engaging.
If you're looking for random paragraphs, you've come to the right place. When a random word or a random sentence isn't quite enough, the next logical step is to find a random paragraph. We created the Random Paragraph Generator with you in mind. The process is quite simple. Choose the number of random paragraphs you'd like to see and click the button. Your chosen number of paragraphs will instantly appear.

While it may not be obvious to everyone, there are a number of reasons creating random paragraphs can be useful. A few examples of how some people use this generator are listed in the following paragraphs.

Creative Writing
Generating random paragraphs can be an excellent way for writers to get their creative flow going at the beginning of the day. The writer has no idea what topic the random paragraph will be about when it appears. This forces the writer to use creativity to complete one of three common writing challenges. The writer can use the paragraph as the first one o
143-  a short story and build upon it. A second option is to use the random paragraph somewhere in a short story they create. The third option is to have the random paragraph be the ending paragraph in a short story. No matter which of these challenges is undertaken, the writer is forced to use creativity to incorporate the paragraph into their writing.

Tackle Writers' Block
A random paragraph can also be an excellent way for a writer to tackle writers' block. Writing block can often happen due to being stuck with a current project that the writer is trying to complete. By inserting a completely random paragraph from which to begin, it can take down some of the issues that may have been causing the writers' block in the first place.

Beginning Writing Routine
Another productive way to use this tool to begin a daily writing routine. One way is to generate a random paragraph with the intention to try to rewrite it while still keeping the original meaning. The purpose here is to just get the
149- writing started so that when the writer goes onto their day's writing projects, words are already flowing from their fingers.

Writing Challenge
Another writing challenge can be to take the individual sentences in the random paragraph and incorporate a single sentence from that into a new paragraph to create a short story. Unlike the random sentence generator, the sentences from the random paragraph will have some connection to one another so it will be a bit different. You also won't know exactly how many sentences will appear in the random paragraph.

Programmers
It's not only writers who can benefit from this free online tool. If you're a programmer who's working on a project where blocks of text are needed, this tool can be a great way to get that. It's a good way to test your programming and that the tool being created is working well.

Above are a few examples of how the random paragraph generator can be beneficial. The best way to see if this random paragraph picker will be useful for your intended purposes is to give it a try. Generate a number of paragraphs to see if they are beneficial to your current project.

If you do find this paragraph tool useful, please do us a favor and let us know how you're using it. It's greatly beneficial for us to know the different ways this tool is being used so we can improve it with updates. This is especially true since there are times when the generators we create get used in completely unanticipated ways from when we initially created them. If you have the time, please send us a quick note on what you'd like to see changed or added to make it better in the future.

Frequently Asked Questions
Can I use these random paragraphs for my project?
Yes! All of the random paragraphs in our generator are free to use for your projects.

Does a computer generate these paragraphs?
No! All of the paragraphs in the generator are written by humans, not computers. When first building this generator we thought about using computers to generate the paragraphs, but they weren't very good and many times didn't make any sense at all. We therefore took the time to create paragraphs specifically for this generator to make it the best that we could.

Can I contribute random paragraphs?
Yes. We're always interested in improving this generator and one of the best ways to do that is to add new and interesting paragraphs to the generator. If you'd like to contribute some random paragraphs, please contact us.

How many words are there in a paragraph?
There are usually about 200 words in a paragraph, but this can vary widely. Most paragraphs focus on a single idea that's expressed with an introductory sentence, then followed by two or more supporting sentences about the idea. A short paragraph may not reach even 50 words while long paragraphs can be over 400 words long, but generally speaking they tend to be approximately 200 words in length.

ADVERTISEMENT

Other Random Generators
Here you can find all the other Random Generators:

Random Word Generator Improved
Random Noun Generator
Random Synonym Generator New
Random Verb Generator
Random Name Generator
Random Adjective Generator
Random Sentence Generator Improved
Random Phrase Generator
ADVERTISEMENT

Weird Words
Fake Words
Random Letter Generator Improved
Random Number Generator Improved
Cursive Letters New
Random Password Generator
Random Bible Verses
Random Pictures New
Wedding Hashtags Generator
Random List
Dinner Ideas Improved
Breakfast Ideas New
Yes or No Oracle
Pictionary Generator
Motivational Quotes
Random Questions
Random Facts Improved
Passive Income Ideas
Vocabulary Words Improved
Writing Prompts
Coin Flip New
Dice Roll New
Never Have I Ever Questions New
Would You Rather Questions New
Truth or Dare Questions New
Decision Maker New
ADVERTISEMENT

CONTACT US
Email: info@1s0s.com

Request a New Feature

OTHER PROJECTS
Bible Verse Generator

Random List Generator

Media Sizes

Productivity Timer

Hashtag Picker

ABOUT US
We created this website to generate random words and more.

Privacy Policy

EXPERIMENTAL FEATURES:
 Dark mode    Slide in text

Computer recycling
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

Computer monitors are typically packed into low stacks on wooden pallets for recycling and then shrink-wrapped.[1]
Computer recycling, electronic recycling or e-waste recycling is the disassembly and separation of components and raw materials of waste electronics. Although the procedures of re-use, donation and repair are not strictly recycling, these are other common sustainable ways to dispose of IT waste.

In 2009, 38% of computers and a quarter of total electronic waste was recycled in the United States, 5% and 3% up from 3 years prior respectively.[2] Since its inception in the early 1990s, more and more devices are recycled worldwide due to increased 
248- wareness and investment. Electronic recycling occurs primarily in order to recover valuable rare earth metals and precious metals, which are in short supply, as well as plastics and metals. These are resold or used in new devices after purification, in effect creating a circular economy. Such processes involve specialised facilities and premises, but within the home or ordinary workplace, sound components of damaged or obsolete computers can often be reused, reducing replacement costs.

Recycling is considered environmentally friendly because it prevents hazardous waste, including heavy metals and carcinogens, from entering the atmosphere, landfill or waterways. While electronics consist a small fraction of total waste generated, they are far more dangerous. There is stringent legislation designed to enforce and encourage the sustainable disposal of appliances, the most notable being the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive of the European Union and the United States National Computer Recycling
250- Act.[3]


Contents
1	Reasons for recycling
2	Regulations
2.1	Europe
2.2	United States
2.2.1	Federal
2.2.2	State
2.3	Asia
2.4	South Africa
3	Recycling methods
3.1	Consumer recycling
3.2	Scrapping/recycling
3.3	Sale
3.4	Take back
3.5	Exchange
3.6	Donations/nonprofits
3.7	Junkyard Computing
4	History
4.1	E-cycling
4.1.1	Pros of e-cycling
4.1.2	Criticisms of e-cycling
4.1.3	The fate of e-waste
4.1.4	Policy issues and current efforts
5	Data security
5.1	Reasons to destroy and recycle securely
5.2	Secure recycling
6	See also
7	References
8	External links
Reasons for recycling
Obsolete computers and old electronics are valuable sources for secondary raw materials if recycled; otherwise, these devices are a source of toxins and carcinogens. Rapid technology change, low initial cost, and planned obsolescence have resulted in a fast-growing surplus of computers and other electronic components around the globe. Technical solutions are available, but in most cases a legal framework, collection system, logistics, and other services need to be implemented before applying a technical solution. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, estimates 30 to 40 million surplus PCs, classified as "hazardous household waste",[4] would
283- be ready for end-of-life management in the next few years. The U.S. National Safety Council estimates that 75% of all personal computers ever sold are now surplus electronics.[5]

In 2007, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stated that more than 63 million computers in the U.S. were traded in for replacement
285-  or discarded. Today, 15% of electronic devices and equipment are recycled in the United States. Most electronic waste is sent to landfills or incinerated, which releases materials such as lead, mercury, or cadmium into the soil, groundwater, and atmosphere, thus having a negative impact on the environment.

Many materials used in computer hardware can be recovered by recycling for use in future production. Reuse of tin, silicon, iron, aluminium, and a variety of plastics that are present in bulk in computers or other electronics can reduce the costs of constructing new systems. Components frequently contain copper, gold, tantalum,[6][7] silver, platinum, palladium, and lead as well as other valuable materials suitable for reclamation.[8][9]

Computer components contain many toxic substances, like dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), cadmium, chromium, radioactive isotopes and mercury. A typical computer monitor may contain more than 6% lead by weight, much of which is in the lead glass of the cathode ray tube (CRT). A typical 15 inch (38 cm) computer monitor may contain 1.5 pounds (1 kg) of lead[4] but other monitors have been estimated to have up to 8 pounds (4 kg) of lead.[1] Circuit boards contain considerable quantities of lead-tin solders that are more likely to leach into groundwater or create air pollution due to incineration. In US landfills, about 40% of the lead content levels are from e-waste.[10] The processing (e.g. incineration and acid treatments) required to reclaim these precious substances may release, generate, or synthesize toxic byproducts.

Export of waste to countries with lower environmental standards is a major concern. The Basel Convention includes hazardous wastes such as, but not limited to, CRT screens as an item that may not be exported transcontinentally without
291- prior consent of both the country exporting and receiving the waste. Companies may find it cost-effective in the short term to sell outdated computers to less developed countries with lax regulations. It is commonly believed that a majority of surplus laptops are routed to developing nations.[11] The high value of working and reusable laptops, computers, and components (e.g. RAM) can help pay the cost of transportation for many worthless commodities.[clarification needed] Laws governing the exportation of waste electronics are put in place to govern recycling companies in developed countries which ship waste to Third World countries. However, concerns about the impact of e-recycling on human health, the health of recycling workers and environmental degradation remain.[12] For example, due to the lack of strict regulations in developing countries, sometimes workers smash old products, propelling toxins on to the ground, contaminating the soil and putting those who do not wear shoes in danger. Other procedures include burning away wire insulation and acid baths to resell circuit boards. These methods pose environmental and health hazards, as toxins are released into the air and acid bath residue can enter the water supply.[10]

Regulations

An abandoned Taxan monitor.
Europe
In Switzerland, the first electro
297- ic waste recycling system was implemented in 1991, beginning with collection of old refrigerators; over the years, all other electric and electronic devices were gradually added to the system. The established producer responsibility organization is SWICO, mainly handling information, communication, and organization technology.[13] The European Union implemented a similar system in February 2003, under the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE Directive, 2002/96/EC).[14]

Pan-European adoption of the Legislation was sl
299- w on take-up, with Italy and the United Kingdom being the final member s
299- ates to pass it into law. The success of the WEEE directive has varied significantly from state to state, with collection rates varying between 13 kilograms per capita per annum to as little as 1 kg per capita per annum. Computers & electronic wastes collected from households within Europe are treated under the WEEE directive via Producer Compliance Schemes (whereby manufacturers of Electronics pay into a scheme that funds its recovery from household waste recycling centres (HWRCs)) and nominated Waste Treatment Facilities (known as Obligated WEEE).

However, recycling of e
301-  corporate Computer Hardware and associated electronic equipment falls outside the Producer Compliance Scheme (Known as non-obligated). In the UK, Waste or obsolete corporate related computer hardware is treated via third party Authorized Treatment Facilities, who normally impose a charge for its collection and treatment.

United States
Federal
The United States Congress considers a number of electronic 
305- aste bills, like the National Computer Recycling Act introduced by Congressman Mike Thompson (D-CA). The main federal law governing solid waste is the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976. It covers only CRTs, though state regulations may differ.[15] There are also separate laws concerning battery disposal. On March 25, 2009, the House Science and Technology Committee approved funding for research on reducing electronic waste and mitigating environmental impact, regarded by sponsor Ralph Hall (R-TX) as the first federal bill to directly address electronic waste.[16]

State
Many states have introduced legislation concerning recycling and reuse of computers or computer parts or other electronics.[17] Most American computer recycling legislations address it from within the larger electronic waste issue.

In 2001, Arkansas enacted the Arkansas Computer and Electronic Solid Waste Management Act, which requires that state agencies manage and sell surplus computer equipment, establishes a computer and electronics recycling fund, and authorizes the Department of Environmental Quality to regulate and/or ban the disposal of computer and electronic equipment in Arkansas landfills.[18]

The recently[when?] passed Electronic Device Recycling Research and Development Act distributes grants to universities, government labs and private industries for research in developing projects in line with e-waste recycling and refurbishment.

Asia
In Japan, sellers and manufacturers of certain electronics (such as televisions and air conditioners) are required to recycle them.[19] This is covered by at least two legislations: the Law for the Promotion of Effective Utilization of Resources (LPUR); and, the Law for the Recycling of Specified Kinds of Home Appliances (LRHA). The former, which was passed in 2001, encouraged manufacturers to voluntarily help recycle goods while the LRHA, which was adopted in 2009, required more recycling efforts by both consumers and manufacturers of home appliances.[20] However, no legislation exists to cover the recycling of computer or cellphone-related wastes.[21]

It is required in South Korea and Taiwan that sellers and manufacturers of electronics be responsible for recycling 75% of their used products.[22] In South Korea, some local governments have introduced recycling initiatives such as the case of Seoul, which launched its specialized e-waste recycling program. This includes the SR Center recycling facility, which takes apart and salvages materials from a fifth of the 10-ton e-waste that the city generates each year.[23]

According to a report by UNEP titled, "Recycling – from E-Waste to Resources," the amount of e-waste being produced – including mobile phones and computers – could rise by as much as 500 percent over the next decade in some countries, such as India.[24]

See also: Electronic waste by country

Electronic waste is often exported to developing countries.

4.5-volt, D, C, AA, AAA, AAAA, A23, 9-volt, CR2032 and LR44 cells are all recyclable in most countries.
One theory is that increased regulation of electronic waste and concern over the environmental harm in mature economies creates an economic disincentive to remove residues prior to export. Critics of trade in used electronics maintain that it is too easy for brokers calling themselves recyclers to export unscreened electronic waste to developing countries, such as China,[25] India and parts of Africa, thus avoiding the expense of removing items like bad cathode ray tubes (the processing of which is expensive and difficult). The developing countries are becoming big dump yards of e-waste. Proponents of international trade point to the success of fair trade programs in other industries, where cooperation has led creation of sustainable jobs, and
326- can bring affordable technology in countries where repair and reuse rates are higher.

Organizations like A2Z Group have stepped in to own up the responsibility to collect and recycle e-waste at various 
328- ocations in India.

South Africa
Thanks to the National Environmental Management Act 1998 and National Environmental Management Waste Act 2008, any person in any position causing harm to the environment and failing to comply with the Waste Act could be fined R10 Million or put into jail or receive both penalties for their transgressions.

Recycling methods

Computers being collected for recycling at a pickup event in Olympia, Washington, United States.
Consumer recycling
Consumer recycling options consists of (see below) sale, donating computers directly to organizations in need, sending devices directly back to their original manufacturers, or getting components to a convenient recycler or refurbisher.

Scrapping/recycling
In the recycling process, TVs, monitors, mobile phones and computers are typically tested for reuse and repaired. If broken, they may be disassembled for parts still having high value if labour is cheap enough. Other e-waste is shredded to roughly 100 mm pieces and manually checked to separate out toxic batteries and capacitors which contain poisonous metals. The remaining pieces are further shredded to ~10 mm and passed under a magnet to remove ferrous metals. An eddy current ejects non-ferrous metals, which are sorted by density either by a centrifuge or vibrating plates. Precious metals can be dissolved in acid, sorted, and smelted into ingots. The remaining glass and plastic fractions are separated by density and sold to re-processors. TVs and monitors must be manually disassembled to remove either toxic lead in CRTs or the mercury in flat screens.[26][27][28]

Corporations face risks both for incompletely destroyed data and for improperly disposed computers. In the UK, some recycling companies use a specialized WEEE-registered contractor to dispose IT equipment and electrical appliances, who disposes it safely and legally. In America, companies are liable for compliance with regulations even if the recycling process is outsourced under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Companies can mitigate these risks by requiring waivers of liability, audit trails, certificates of data destruction, signed confidentiality agreements, and random audits of information security. The National Association of Information Destruction is an international trade association for data destruction providers.[29]

Sale
Online auctions are an alternative for consumers willing to resell for cash less fees, in a complicated, self-managed, competitive environment[30] where paid listings might not sell.[31] Online classified ads can be similarly risky due to forgery scams and uncertainty.[32]

Take back
When researching computer companies before a computer purchase, consumers can find out if they offer recycling services. Most major computer manufacturers offer some form of recycling. At the user's request they may mail in their old computers, or arrange for pickup from the manufacturer.

Hewlett-Packard also offers free recycling, but only one of its "national" recycling programs is available nationally, rather than in one or two specific states.[33] Hewlett-Packard also offers to pick up any computer product of any brand for a fee, and to offer a coupon against the purchase of future computers or components; it was the largest computer recycler in America in 2003, and it has recycled over 750,000,000 pounds (340,000,000 kg) of electronic waste globally[4] since 1995.[34] It encourages the shared approach of collection points for consumers and recyclers to meet.[35]

Exchange
Manufacturers often offer a free replacement service when purchasing a new PC. Dell Computers and Apple Inc. take back old products when one buys a new one. Both refurbish and resell their own computers with a one-year warranty.[32]

Many companies purchase and recycle all brands of working and broken laptops and notebook computers from individuals and corporations. Building a market for recycling of desktop computers has proven more difficult than exchange programs for laptops, smartphones and other smaller electronics.[36] A basic business model is to provide a seller an instant online quote based on laptop characteristics, then to send a shipping label and prepaid box to the seller, to erase, reformat, and process the laptop, and to pay rapidly by cheque.[11] A majority of these companies are also generalized electronic waste recyclers as well; organizations that recycle computers exclusively include Cash For Laptops, a laptop refurbisher in Nevada that claims to be the first to buy laptops online, in 2001.[36]

Donations/nonprofits
With the constant rising costs due to inflation, many families or schools do not have the sufficient funds available for computers to be utilized along with education standards. Families also impacted by disaster suffer as well due to the financial impact of the situation they have incurred. Many nonprofit organizations, such as InterConnection.org, can be found locally as well as around the web and give detailed descriptions as to what methods are used for dissemination and detailed instructions on how to donate. The impact can be seen locally and globally, affecting thousands of those in need. In Canada non profit organizations engaged in computer recycling, such as The Electronic Recycling 
358- ssociation Calgary, Edmonton, Vancouver, Winnipeg, Toronto, Montreal,[37] Computers for Schools Canada wide,[38] are very active in collecting and refurbishing computers and laptops to help the non profit and charitable sectors and schools.

Junkyard Computing
The term junkyard computing is a colloquial expression for using old or inferior hardware to fulfill computational tasks while handling reliability and availability on software level. It utilizes abstraction of computational resources via software, allowing hardware replacement at very low effort. Ease of replacement is hereby a corner point since hardware failures are expected at any time due to the condition of the underlying infrastructure. This paradigm became more widely used with the introduction of cluster orchestration software like Kubernetes or Apache Mesos, since large monolithic applications require reliability and availability on machine level whereas this kind of software is fault tolerant by design. Those orchestration tools also introduced fairly fast set-up processes allowing to use junkyard computing economically and even making this pattern applicable in the first place. Further use cases were introduced when continuous delivery was getting more widely accepted. Infrastructure to execute tests and static code analysis was needed which requires as much performance as possible while being extremely cost effective. From an economical and technological perspective, junkyard computing is only practicable for a small number of users or companies. It already requires a decent number of physical machines to compensate for hardware failures while maintaining the required reliability and availability. This implies a direct need for a matching underling infrastructure to house all the computers and servers. Scaling this paradigm is also quite limited due to the increasing importance of factors like power efficiency and maintenance efforts, making this kind of computing perfect for mid-sized applications.

History
Although consumer electronics such as the radio have been popular since the 1920s, recycling was almost unheard of until the early 1990s.[39] At the end of the 1970s, the accelerating pace of domestic consumer electronics drastically shortened the lifespan of electronics such as TVs, VCRs and audio. New innovations appeared more quickly, making older equipment considered obsolete. Increased complexity and sophistication of manufacture made local repair more difficult. The retail market shifted gradually, but substantially, from a few high-value items that were cherished for years and repaired when necessary, to short-lived items that were rapidly replaced owing to wear or simply fashion, and discarded rather than repaired. This was particularly evident in computing, highlighted by Moore's Law. In 1988 two severe incidents highlighted the approaching e-waste crisis. The cargo barge Khian Sea, was loaded with more than 14,000 tons of toxic ash from Pennsylvania which had been refused acceptance in New Jersey and the Caribbean. After sailing for 16 months, all the waste was dumped as "topsoil fertiliser" in Ha
364- ti and in the Bay of Bengal by November 1988. In June 1988, a large illegal toxic waste dump which had been created by an Italian company was discovered.[40] This led to the formation of the Basel Convention to stem the flow of poisonous substances from developed countries in 1989.[41]

In 1991, the first electronic waste recycling system was implemented in Switzerland, beginning with collection of old refrigerators but gradually expanding to cover all devices. The organisation SWICO handles the programme, and is a partnership between IT retailers.[42]

The first publication to report the recycling of computers and electronic waste was published on the front page of the New York Times on April 14, 1993 by columnist Steve Lohr. It detailed the work of Advanced Recovery Inc., a small recycler, in trying to safely dismantle computers, even if most waste was landfilled.[43] Several other companies emerged in the early 1990s, chiefly in Europe, where national 'take back' laws compelled retailers to use them.

After these schemes were set up, many countries did not have the capacity to deal with the sheer quantity of e-waste they generated or its hazardous nature. They began to export the problem to developing countries without enforced environmental legislation. This is cheaper: the cost of recycling of computer monitors in the US is ten times more than in China. Demand in Asia for electronic waste began to grow when scrap yards found they could extract valuable substances such as copper, iron, silicon, nickel and gold, during the recycling process.[44]

The Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE Directive) became European Law in February 2003 and covers all aspects of recycling all types of appliance. This was followed by Electronic Waste Recycling Act, enshrined in Californian law in January 2005

The 2000s saw a large increase in both the sale of electronic devices and their growth as a waste stream: in 2002 e-waste grew faster than any other type of waste in the EU.[45] This caused investment in modern, automated facilities to cope with the influx of redundant appliances.[46][47][48][49]

E-cycling
E-cycling or "E-waste" is an initiative by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) which refers to donations, reuse, shredding and general collection of used electronics. Generically, the term refers to the process of collecting, brokering, disassembling, repairing and recycling the components or metals contained in used or discarded electronic equipment, otherwise known as electronic waste (e-waste). "E-cyclable" items include, but are not limited to: televisions, computers, microwave ovens, vacuum cleaners, telephones and cellular phones, stereos, and VCRs and DVDs just about anything that has a cord, light or takes some kind of battery.[50]

Investment in e-cycling facilities has been increasing recently due to technology's rapid rate of obsolescence, concern over improper methods, and opportunities for manufacturers to influence the secondary market (used and reused products). Higher metal prices can result in more recycling taking place.[51] The controversy around methods stems from a lack of agreement over preferred outcomes.

World markets with lower disposable incomes, consider 75% repair and reuse to be valuable enough to justify 25% disposal. Debate and certification standards may be leading to better definitions, though civil law contracts, governing the expected process are still vital to any contracted process, as poorly defined as "e-cycling".

Pros of e-cycling
The e-waste disposal occurring after processing for reuse, repair of equipment, and recovery of metals may be unethical or illegal when e-scrap of many kinds is transported overseas to developing countries for such processing. It is transported as if to be repaired and/or recycled, but after processing the less valuable e-scrap becomes e-waste/pollution there. Another point of view is that the net environmental cost must be compared to and include the mining, refining and extraction with its waste and pollution cost of new products manufactured to replace secondary products which are routinely destroyed in wealthier nations, and which cannot economically be repaired in older or obsolete products.

As an example of negative impacts of e-waste, pollution of groundwater has become so serious in areas surrounding China's landfills that water must be shipped in
386- from 18 miles (29 km) away.[52] However, mining of new metals can have even broader impacts on groundwater. Either thorough e-cycling processing, domestic processing or overseas repair, can help the environment by avoiding pollution. Such e-cycling can theoretically be a sustainable alternative to disposing of e-waste in landfills. In addition, e-cycling allows for the reclamation of potential conflict minerals, like gold and wolframite, which requires less of those to be mined and lessens the potential money flow to militias and other exploitative actors in third-world that profit from mining them.

Supporters of one form of "required e-cycling" legislation argue that e-cycling saves taxpayers money,[53] as the financial responsibility would be shifted from the taxpayer to the manufacturers. Advocates of more simple legislation (such as landfill bans for e-waste) argue that involving manufacturers does not reduce the cost to consumers, if reuse value is lost, and the resulting costs are then passed on to consumers in new products, particularly affecting markets which can hardly afford new products. It is theorized that manufacturers who take part in e-cycling would be motivated to use fewer materials in the production process, create longer lasting products, and implement safer, more efficient recycling systems.[54] This theory is sharply disputed and has never been demonstrated.

Criticisms of e-cycling
The critics of e-cycling are just as vocal as its advocates. According to the Reason Foundation, e-cycling only raises the product and waste management costs of e-waste for consumers and limits innovation on the part of high-tech companies.[55] They also believe that e-cycling facilities could unintentionally cause great harm to the environment. Critics claim that e-waste doesn't occupy a significant portion of total waste. According to a European study, only 4% of waste is electronic[citation needed].

Another opposition to e-cycling is that many problems are posed in disassembly: the process is costly and dangerous because of the heavy metals of which the electronic products are composed, and as little as 1–5% of the original cost of materials can be retrieved. A final problem that people find is that identity fraud is all too common in regards to the disposal of electronic products.[56] As the programs are legislated, creating winners and losers among e-cyclers with different locations and processes, it may be difficult to distinguish between criticism of e-cycling as a practice, and criticism of the specific legislated means proposed to enhance it.

The fate of e-waste
A hefty criticism often lobbed at reuse based recyclers is that people think that they are recycling their electronic waste, when in reality it is actually being exported to developing countries like China, India, and Nigeria. For instance, at free recycling drives, "recyclers" may not be staying true to their word, but selling e-waste overseas[52] or to parts brokers.[57] Studies indicate that 50–80% of the 300,000 to 400,000 tons (270,000 to 360,000 tonnes) of e-waste is being sent overseas, and that approximately 2 million tons (1.8 million tonnes) per year go to U.S. landfills.[52]

Although not possible in all circumstances, the best way to e-cycle is to upcycle e-waste.[58] On the other hand, the electronic products in question are generally manufactured, and
398- repaired under warranty, in the same nations, which anti-reuse recyclers depict as primitive. Reuse-based e-recyclers believe that fair-trade incentives for export markets will lead to better results than domestic shredding. There has been a continued debate between export-friendly e-cycling and increased regulation of that practice.[59]

In the European Union, debate regarding the export of e-waste has resulted in a significant amendment to the WEEE directive (January 2012) with a view to significantly diminishing the export of WEEE (untreated e-waste). During debate in Strasburg, MEPs stated that "53 million tonnes of WEEE were generated in 2009 but only 18% collected for recycling"[60] with the remainder being exported or sent to landfill. The Amendment, voted through by a unanimous 95% of representatives, removed the re-use (repair and refurbishmet) aspect of the directive and placed more emphasis upon recycling and recovery of precious metals and base metals. The changes went further by placing the burden upon registered exporters to prove that used equipment leaving Europe was "fit for purpose".

Policy issues and current efforts
Currently, pieces of government legislation and a number of grassroots efforts have contributed to the growth of e-cycling processes which emphasize decreased exports over increased reuse rates. The Electronic Waste Recycling Act was passed in California in 2003.[61] It requires that consumers pay an extra fee for certain types of electronics, and the collected money be then redistributed to recycling companies that are qualified to properly recycle these products. It is the only state that legislates against e-waste through this kind of consumer fee; the other states' e fforts focus on producer responsibility laws or waste disposal bans. No study has shown that per capita recovery is greater in one type of legislate
403-  program (e.g. California) versus ordinary waste disposal bans (e.g. Massachusetts), though recovery has greatly increased in states which use either method.

As of September, 2006, Dell developed the nation's first completely free recycling program,[62] furthering the responsibilities that manufacturers are taking for e-cycling. Manufacturers and retailers such as Best Buy, Sony, and Samsung have also set up recycling programs.[63] This program does not accept televisions, which are the most expensive used electronic item, and are unpopular in markets which must deal with televisions when the more valuable computers have been cherry picked.

Another step being taken is the recyclers’ pledge of true stewardship, sponsored by the Computer TakeBack Campaign. It has been signed by numerous recyclers promising to recycle responsibly. Grassroots efforts have also played a big part in this issue, as they and other community organizations are being fo
407- med to help responsibly recycle e-waste.[62] Other grassroots campaigns are Basel, the Computer TakeBack Campaign (co-coordinated by the Grassroots Recycling Network), and the Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition. No study has shown any difference in recycling methods under the Pledge, and no data is available to demonstrate difference in management between "Pledge" and non-Pledge companies, though it is assumed that the risk of making false claims will prevent Pledge companies from wrongly describing their processes.

Many people believe that the U.S. should follow the European Union model in regards to its management of e-waste, such as the Extended Producer Responsibility, which was started in Sweden in 1990.[64] In this program, a directive forces manufacturers to take responsibility for e-cycling; it also demands manufacturers' mandatory take-back and places bans on exporting e-waste to developing countries. British Columbia has more than 20 EPR programs under the Recycling Regulation legislation, which stops e-waste from being put into landfills and recycles them instead. There are more than 80 programs in Canada as of 2013.[64]

Another longer-term solution is for computers to be composed of less dangerous products and many people disagree. No data has been provided to show that people who agree with the European model have based their agreement on measured outcomes or experience-based scientific method.

Data security

Electronic waste dump at Agbogbloshie, Ghana. Organized criminals commonly search the drives for information to use in local scams.[65]
E-waste presents a potential security threat to individuals and exporting countries. Hard drives that are not properly erased before the computer is disposed of can be reopened, exposing sensitive information. Credit card numbers, private financial data, account information and records of online transactions can be accessed by most willing individuals. Organized criminals in Ghana commonly search the drives for information to use in local scams.[65]

Government contracts have been discovered on hard drives found in Agbogbloshie, Ghana. Multimillion-dollar agreements from United States security institutions such as the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), the Transportation Security Administration and Homeland Security have all resurfaced in Agbogbloshie.[65][66]

Reasons to destroy and recycle securely
There are ways to ensure that not only hardware is destroyed but also the private data on the hard drive. Having customer data stolen, lost, or misplaced contributes to the ever-growing number of people who are affected by identity theft, which can cause corporations to lose more than just money. The image of a company that holds secure data, such as banks, law firms, pharmaceuticals, and credit corporations is also at risk. If a company's public image is hurt, it could cause consumers to not use their services and could cost millions in business losses and positive public relation campaigns. The cost of data breaches "varies widely, ranging from $90 to $50,000 (under HIPAA's new HITECH amendment, that came about through the American Recovery and Revitalization act of 2009), as per customer record, depending on whether the breach is “low-profile” or “high-profile” and the company is in a non-regulated or highly regulated area, such as banking or medical institutions.”[67]

There is also a major backlash from the consumer if there is a data breach in a company that is supposed to be trusted to protect their private information. If an organization has any consumer info on file, they must by law (Red Flags Clarification act of 2010) have written information protection policies and procedures in place, that serve to combat, mitigate, and detect vulnerable areas that could result in identity theft. The United States Department of Defense has published a standard to which recyclers and individuals may meet in order to satisfy HIPAA requirements.

Secure recycling
Countries have developed standards, aimed at businesses and with the purpose of ensuring the security of Data contained in 'confidential' computer media [NIST 800-88: US standard for Data Remanence][HMG CESG IS5, Baseline & Enhanced, UK Government Protocol for Data Destruction]. National Association for Information Destruction (NAID) "is the international trade association for companies providing information destruction services. Suppliers of products, equipment and services to destruction companies are also eligible for membership. NAID's mission is to promote the information destruction industry and the standards and ethics of its member companies."[68] There are companies that follow the guidelines from NAID and also meet all Federal EPA and local DEP regulations.

The typical process for computer recycling aims to securely destroy hard drives while still recycling the byproduct. A typical process for effective computer recycling:

Receive hardware for destruction in locked and securely transported vehicles.
Shred hard drives.
Separate all aluminum from the waste metals with an electromagnet.
Collect and securely deliver the shredded remains to an aluminum recycling plant.
Mold the remaining hard drive parts into aluminum ingots.
The Asset Disposal and Information Security Alliance (ADISA) publishes an ADISA IT Asset Disposal Security Standard that covers all phases of the e-waste disposal process from collection to transportation, storage and sanitization's at the disposal facility. It also conducts periodic audits of disposal vendors.[69]

See also
icon	Electronics portal
References
 Royte, Elizabeth (2005-08-01). "E-gad! Americans discard more than 100 million computers, cellphones and other electronic devices each year. As "e-waste" piles up, so does concern about this growing threat to the environment". Smithsonian Magazine. Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved 2009-03-17.
 Nguemaleu, Raoul-Abelin Choumin; Montheu, Lionel (2014-05-09). Roadmap to Greener Computing. CRC Press. p. 170. ISBN 9781466506848.
 National Computer Recycling Act of 2005, H.R. 425, 109th Cong. (2005–2006)
 Morgan, Russell (2006-08-21). "Tips and Tricks for Recycling Old Computers". SmartBiz. Retrieved 2009-03-17.
 Harris, Mark (2008-08-17). "E-mail from America: Buy-back gadgets". Sunday Times. Seattle, Washington. Retrieved 2009-03-10.
 Robert-Tissot, Sarah (2011). "TANTALUM". Royal Australian Chemical instatute. Retrieved March 3, 2019.
 Padilla, Abraham (February 2019). "TANTALUM" (PDF). United states geological survey. Retrieved March 3, 2019.
 Bleiwas, D (July 2001). "Obsolete Computers, "Gold Mine," or High-Tech Trash? Resource Recovery from Recycling" (PDF). USGS. Retrieved March 4, 2019.
 LeBlanc, Rick. "Electronic Devices a Rich Source of Precious Metals for Recyclers". The Balance Small Business. Retrieved 2019-03-04.
 Toothman, Jessika. "What Happens to your Discarded Old Computer?". HowStuffWorks.
 Prashant, Nitya (2008-08-20). "Cash For Laptops Offers 'Green' Solution for Broken or Outdated Computers". Green Technology. Norwalk, Connecticut: Technology Marketing Corporation. Retrieved 2009-03-17. In "Opinion". National Center For Electronics Recycling News Summary. National Center For Electronics Recycling. 2008-08-28. Archived from the original on 2011-07-26. Retrieved 2009-03-17.
 Bakhiyi, Bouchra; Gravel, Sabrina; Ceballos, Diana; Flynn, Michael A.; Zayed, Joseph (2018). "Has the question of e-waste opened a Pandora's box? An overview of unpredictable issues and challenges". Environment International. 110: 173–192. doi:10.1016/j.envint.2017.10.021. PMID 29122313.
 "Umwelt Schweiz, Electrical and electronic equipment". Retrieved 2006-11-24.
 "Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment".
 "Final Rules on Cathode Ray Tubes and Discarded Mercury-Containing Equipment". U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
 "House Panel Approves Bill to Aid Disposal of Unwanted Electronics". Congressional Quarterly. 2009-03-25. Archived from the original on 2009-03-30. Retrieved 2009-04-13.
 "Electronic Waste". Archived from the original on 2005-02-16.
 "Arkansas Computer and Electronic Solid Waste Management Act" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-02-14.
 "A comparative study of e-waste recycling systems" (PDF). Sun-Woo Chung & Rei Murakama-Suzuki. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-02-12.
 Picken, Stuart (2016). Historical Dictionary of Japanese Business, 2nd ed. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 138. ISBN 9781442255883.
 Tim Hornyak (17 September 2010). "Recycling electronic waste in Japan: Better late than never". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 7 April 2012.
 Dorion, Christiane (2007). Earth's Garbage Crisis. Milwaukee: Gareth Stevens Publishing LLLP. pp. 16. ISBN 9780836877533.
 Strother, Jason. "South Korea Launches Initiative to Recycle More E-Waste". VOA. Retrieved 2018-09-13.
 "The global E-Waste Problem".
 Elizabeth Grossman (10 April 2006). "Where computers go to die – and kill". Salon.com. Retrieved 7 April 2012.
 Hogye, Thomas Q. "The Anatomy of a Computer Recycling Process" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-09-23. Retrieved 2016-08-13.
 "Sweeep Kuusakoski – Resources – BBC Documentary". www.sweeepkuusakoski.co.uk. Retrieved 2015-07-31.
 "Sweeep Kuusakoski – Glass Recycling – BBC filming of CRT furnace". www.sweeepkuusakoski.co.uk. Retrieved 2015-07-31.
 Kuhlenbeck, Phil (2006-06-09). "Law holds businesses responsible for disposal of computers". Austin Business Journal. Retrieved 2009-03-17.
 Perepelkin, Plato (2008-09-18). "Brisk sales of Apple's new 3G model have consumers scrambling to profit from their 'old' phones at Cashforiphones.com" (PDF). Computer Apple Digest. pp. 16–18. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-20. Retrieved 2009-03-05.
 Albanesius, Chloe (2008-07-28). "Gazelle Will Give You Cash for Your Gadgets". News and Analysis. PC Magazine. Retrieved 2009-03-05.
 Bray, Hiawatha (2008-10-30). "Scrounge up cash with used gadgets". Boston Globe. Globe Newspaper Company. Retrieved 2009-03-05.
 "HP Environment: Product Return & Recycling".
 Haffenreffer, David (2003-02-13). "Recycling, the Hewlett-Packard Way". Financial Times. CNN. Retrieved 2009-03-17.
 Dean, Katie (2003-06-25). "Bill Aims to Cut Computer Clutter". Wired Magazine. Archived from the original on 2009-07-29. Retrieved 2009-03-17.
 NNBW Staff (2009-03-30). "Cash-strapped consumers turn to laptops recycler". Northern Nevada Business Weekly. 7 (34). Archived from the original on 2012-12-31. Retrieved 2009-04-13.
 The Electronic Recycling Association is doing computer recycling in Calgary, Edmonton, Winnipeg, Vancouver, retrieved 19 December 2015
 Anyone can give to Computers for Schools., retrieved 19 December 2015
 "CRC History – Computer Recycling Center". www.crc.org. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 ""Two Decades After the Koko Incident" by Dr. S. Gozie Ogbodo". digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 "E-Wasted Timeline". www.e-wastedmovie.com. Archived from the original on 2015-08-13. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 "About us – Swico Recycling". www.swicorecycling.ch. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 Lohr, Steve (1993-04-14). "Recycling Answer Sought for Computer Junk". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 "Where does e-waste end up?". www.greenpeace.org/. Greenpeace. 24 February 2009. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 Kinver, Mark (2007-07-03). "Mechanics of e-waste recycling". BBC. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 "Bulgaria opens largest WEEE recycling factory in Eastern Europe". www.ask-eu.com. WtERT Germany GmbH. 12 Jul 2010. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 "EnvironCom opens largest WEEE recycling facility / waste & recycling news". www.greenwisebusiness.co.uk. The Sixty Mile Publishing Company. 4 March 2010. Archived from the original on 28 September 2010. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 Goodman, Peter S. (11 Jan 2012). "Where Gadgets Go To Die: E-Waste Recycler Opens New Plant In Las Vegas". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 Moses, Asher (19 Nov 2008). "New plant tackles our electronic leftovers – BizTech – Technology – smh.com.au". www.smh.com.au. Retrieved 2015-07-29.
 T. Gallo, Daniel (2013-07-15). "Broad Overview of E-Waste Management Policies in the U.S." (PDF). www.epa.gov. Retrieved 2020-01-17.
 https://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/circ1196-AA/pdf/circ1196-AA.pdf
 "Most U.S. Electronic Waste is Pollution-and-Worker-Danger Shipped Overseas". Ethical Shopping. 19 November 2007. Retrieved 29 November 2007.
 About the Campaign, Computer TakeBack Campaign, retrieved 28 October 2007
 "Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition". Retrieved 30 October 2007.[permanent dead link]
 "E-Waste Politics". Scarlett, Lynn – Reason Foundation. 4 October 2000. Retrieved 23 November 2012.
 "The Importance of Responsible Recycling for Used Electronics". Electronic Industries Alliance. 2007. Retrieved 29 November 2007.
 "Much toxic computer waste lands in Third World". USA Today. 25 February 2002. Retrieved 27 September 2007.
 Melanie Kozlan (2 November 2010). "What is 'E-Waste' & How Can I Get Rid Of It?!". Four Green Steps. Archived from the original on 30 November 2010. Retrieved 4 November 2010.
 "Revenge of the TV Monitor Zombies". Discovery News. 30 July 2010. Retrieved 8 January 2011.
 "What the Recast WEEE Directive means for the UK". IT-Green. Retrieved 10 February 2012.
 "Electronic Waste Recycling Act of 2003: Covered Electronic Waste Payment System (SB 20/SB 50)". California Integrated Waste Management Board. 1 November 2007. Archived from the original on 26 January 2007. Retrieved 28 November 2007.
 Moore, Elizabeth Armstrong. "Momentum Builds for 'Revolution' to Recycle Electronic Waste." 31 July 2006. The Christian Science Monitor. Accessed 29 November 2007. [1].
 Rob Pegoraro (5 July 2009), Help File: Recycling Old Electronics, The Washington Post, retrieved 7 April 2012
 "Extended Producer Responsibility in BC".
 "Africa’s Agbogbloshie Market Is a Computer Graveyard" NewsBreakingOnline.com. Web. 20 February 2011.
 Doctorow, Cory. "Illegal E-waste Dumped in Ghana Includes Unencrypted Hard Drives Full of US Security Secrets." Boing Boing. 25 June 2009. Web. 15 March 2011.
 "ID Theft Center". 2009-01-01. Archived from the original on 2009-08-31. Retrieved 2009-08-14.
 "NAID". 2009-01-01. Retrieved 2009-08-14.
 http://www.adisa.org.uk
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Electronics recycling.
European Commission Circular Economy Package 2015
RECYCLING – FROM E-WASTE TO RESOURCES (UN Environmental Program, 2009, 120 pages)
WEEE Directive (U.K.)
WEEE Directive (E.C.)
Computer Donation Locations (U.S.)
vte
Recycling
vte
Biosolids, waste, and waste management
Categories: Computer recyclingData securityWater conservationEnergy conservation
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Português
Čeština
Simple English
Español
中文
Русский
العربية
3 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 29 June 2020, at 19:32 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Help
Search results
Jump to navigationJump to search
most wood county site
Results 1 – 20 of 18,190
The page "Most wood county site" does not exist. You can ask for it to be created, but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered.
Fort Leonard Wood
Realignment and Closure process, most of the U.S. Army Engineer School's operations were consolidated at Fort Leonard Wood. Before that, officer training
31 KB (3,635 words) - 17:49, 3 June 2020
Fields of the Wood
Fields of the Wood is a religious park of more than 200 acres in Cherokee County, North Carolina, owned by the Church of God of Prophecy. It is best known
5 KB (731 words) - 05:17, 1 April 2018
Northaw Great Wood
pipits, but the management plan for the wood aims to restore biodiversity. The site has one of the county's most extensive areas of ancient hornbeam woodland
3 KB (276 words) - 20:07, 21 September 2018
Wood County, Wisconsin
Wood County is a county located in the U.S. state of Wisconsin. As of the 2010 census, the population was 74,749. Its county seat is Wisconsin Rapids.
31 KB (1,792 words) - 02:25, 2 July 2020
John Wood Mansion
log cabin in 1837. Quincy is the county seat of Adams County. Wood founded both the county (1825) and city (1835). Wood's 14-room mansion was built by John
4 KB (373 words) - 13:42, 7 February 2020
Green-Wood Cemetery
Green-Wood Cemetery is a 478-acre (193 ha) cemetery in the western portion of Brooklyn, New York City. The cemetery is located between South Slope/Greenwood
49 KB (5,368 words) - 15:16, 9 July 2020
Pulaski County, Missouri
Revolution. Pulaski County is the site of Fort Leonard Wood, a U.S. Army training base. It comprises the Fort Leonard Wood, MO Micropolitan Statistical Area
55 KB (3,588 words) - 23:25, 12 May 2020
Glynn County, Georgia
Georgia" site, the "Brunswick Wood Preserving" site, the "Hercules 009 Landfill" site, and the "Terry Creek Dredge Spoil Areas/Hercules Outfall" site. The
28 KB (1,885 words) - 00:42, 24 June 2020
Boulsbury Wood
Wood is the most species-rich wood in the county. Some parts are ancient woodland, with records dating from the thirteenth century. "Designated Sites
2 KB (139 words) - 16:16, 4 May 2020
Swithland Wood and The Brand
Swithland Wood and The Brand is a 87.9 hectares (217 acres) biological Site of Special Scientific Interest south of Woodhouse Eaves in Leicestershire
22 KB (2,421 words) - 21:33, 30 May 2019
Woodside High School, Wood Green
over the Glendale Avenue site in 1967 and at the same time Wood Green Grammar became Wood Green comprehensive school. The new Wood Green comprehensive school
10 KB (1,155 words) - 10:27, 30 June 2020
Kingston Wood and Outliers
Kingston Wood and Outliers is a 47.4 hectare biological Site of Special Scientific Interest south-west of Kingston in Cambridgeshire. The site comprises
2 KB (168 words) - 11:25, 2 May 2019
St John's Wood
based at St John's Wood Barracks. The regiment moved to Woolwich on 6 February 2012; the barracks has been demolished and the site developed as upmarket
21 KB (2,122 words) - 21:30, 24 June 2020
Abbey Wood
Historic County of Kent. From Summer 2021, Abbey Wood will be connected by Crossrail's Elizabeth Line. The district takes its name from Lesnes Abbey Woods, located
15 KB (1,831 words) - 22:22, 1 July 2020
Tiger Woods
and also holds numerous golf records. Woods is widely regarded as one of the greatest golfers, and one of the most famous athletes of all time. He will
158 KB (13,756 words) - 04:17, 16 July 2020
Piney Woods
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) defines most of this ecoregion as the South Central Plains. The Piney Woods cover a 54,400-square-mile (141,000 km2)
15 KB (1,395 words) - 16:06, 7 July 2020
Finemere Wood
and Buckinghamshire County Council. The wood was formerly part of Bernwood Forest, a medieval royal hunting forest. Most of the site is ancient pedunculate
3 KB (187 words) - 10:51, 16 December 2019
Forest Preserve District of Cook County
National Historic Site Illinois Nature Preserves Red Gate Woods North Creek Woods Sauk Trail Woods Forest Preserve District of Cook County - Official Website
20 KB (2,131 words) - 11:03, 14 June 2020
Cross in the Woods
Fredericks. The site also includes outdoor and indoor churches, numerous smaller shrines, and a nun doll museum. The Cross in the Woods is open 365 days
11 KB (1,536 words) - 04:29, 17 April 2020
Lake of the Woods
Lake of the Woods (French: lac des Bois) is a lake occupying parts of the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Manitoba and the U.S. state of Minnesota.
13 KB (1,645 words) - 17:50, 25 June 2020
Results from sister projects

Popular Science Monthly/Volume 49/July 1896/County Parks
sites, and (2) the lack of suitable control. As to the first, it may be said that in a great number of our counties, especially eastward, such sites exist
 Texts from Wikisource
James P. Gray
and writer. He was the presiding judge of the Superior Court of Orange County, California. Gray was the 2012 Libertarian Party vice presidential nominee
 Quotes from Wikiquote
History of Edmeston, New York/1820s
took a salary, had a farm of 80 acres and the church helped him get his wood (cut and drawn by a bee), and also his hay. The old school house was burned
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)

Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Special pageSearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
Special pages
Printable version

Languages
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 Page protected
Portal:Current events
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Edit instructions
Globe icon
Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths
Topics in the news
COVID-19 pandemic
Disease Virus Testing Timeline By location Impact Notable deaths Portal
C/2020 F3 (NEOWISE)
C/2020 F3 (NEOWISE)
Comet NEOWISE (pictured) is visible to the naked eye in the Northern Hemisphere.
In the Singaporean general election, the People's Action Party retains its supermajority with Lee Hsien Loong remaining as the country's prime minister.
Bulgaria and Croatia join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism 2, the first major step in their adoption of the euro.
Ongoing: George Floyd protests
Recent deaths: Oscar Hugh Lipscomb Toke Talagi Daniel Lewis Lee Marilyn Howard Grant Imahara Naya Rivera
Nominate an article
July 16, 2020 (Thursday)
edithistorywatch
Health and environment
COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 pandemic in Japan
Reuters reports that the occupation of geisha in Tokyo, Japan is threatened by the pandemic, with awkward working conditions and the absence of new apprentices. (Reuters)
Law and crime
Samoan Prime Minister Tuilaepa Aiono Sailele Malielegaoi says his country is "looking seriously at banning Facebook in the country" after "many people complained how it is used to hurt people", being himself a target of "defamation". (RNZ)
In the United Kingdom, the Court of Appeal rules that 20-year-old British-born Shamima Begum, who left the country to join ISIL in 2015, can return to the UK to fight for her citizenship after the Home Office had revoked it due to her living in a refugee camp in Syria. The Home Office says the Court decision is "very disappointing" and that it would apply for permission to appeal. (BBC)
Politics and elections
2020 North Macedonian parliamentary election
The Social Democratic Union of Macedonia is projected to win a plurality of votes in North Macedonia's latest election. The nationalist VMRO-DPMNE would come a close second. (DW)
July 15, 2020 (Wednesday)
edithistorywatch
Armed conflicts and attacks
Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen
Saudi-led coalition airstrikes kill at least seven civilians when they hit houses in the Al Jawf Governorate of Yemen. The Houthis report nine killed, two of them children. The coalition did not immediately comment on the airstrike. (Reuters)
Arts and culture
George Floyd protests in the United Kingdom
A statue of Black Lives Matter protester Jen Reid is briefly erected without permission on the plinth of the toppled statue of Edward Colston before being removed the next day. (CBS News)
Business and economy
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles and Groupe PSA announce that when their planned merger is completed, expected in 2021, the merged company will be known as Stellantis. (Detroit Free Press)
Disasters and accidents
2020 Iran explosions
At least seven ships are burnt following an unspecified incident in the Iranian port city of Bushehr. (Al Arabiya) (Bloomberg)
At least 50 people have been killed and more than two million affected by heavy monsoon flooding in Assam, India. (BBC)
Health and environment
COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 pandemic in Asia
COVID-19 pandemic in Indonesia
Indonesia announced the biggest daily rise of 87 new COVID-19 deaths, taking the nationwide death toll at 3,797. The country also announce their biggest daily rise of 1,414 new recoveries, taking the nationwide tally at 39,050. The cumulative cases reach 80,000. (detikNews)
COVID-19 pandemic in India
India reimposes a two-week lockdown in parts of the country as the country records 30,000 new daily cases. (Time)
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States
COVID-19 pandemic in Alabama
Governor Kay Ivey issues a mandatory statewide face mask order through July 31. (The Hill)
COVID-19 pandemic in Michigan
Michigan reports 891 new cases, its highest single-day new case total since May 14. (MLive.com)
Law and crime
Killing of George Floyd
A new police body camera video emerges of George Floyd pleading with officers before his death. (BBC)
A lawsuit is filed against the Minneapolis police officers involved in Floyd's death. (The Chicago Tribune)
Crime in Norway
A woman dies and two more people are injured during a series of stabbings in Sarpsborg, Norway. A Norwegian man, who had a relationship with the two wounded victims, is arrested. (BBC)
Politics and elections
2020 North Macedonian parliamentary election
Voters in North Macedonia head to the polls to elect the members of the country's assembly. It is the first election after the country adopted its new name following a decade-long dispute. The election had to be postponed once due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. (TheGuardian)
2020 United States presidential election
Kanye West 2020 presidential campaign
Kanye West files paperwork with the Federal Election Commission for his presidential campaign after reports that he dropped out of the race. (NME)
Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign
President Trump replaces Brad Parscale as campaign manager with Bill Stepien, former White House political director and a field director for the 2016 presidential campaign. Parscale, who has reportedly been blamed for the poorly attended rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last month, will stay on as senior adviser. (BBC) (UPI)
July 14, 2020 (Tuesday)
edithistorywatch
Arts and culture
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
The University of Mississippi removes a monument of Confederate soldiers from the campus. The monument is expected to be relocated to a cemetery. (NBC News)
Disasters and accidents
2020 Iran explosions
Iranian police launch an investigation following another suspicious explosion, this one at an industrial complex south of Mashhad. (Al-Monitor)
The fire on USS Bonhomme Richard continues for a third consecutive day. The United States Navy says its crews have made significant progress fighting flames and reducing smoke, but it is still unclear when the fire will be extinguished. There have been 61 injuries; 38 sailors and 23 civilians have been treated mostly for minor injuries related to firefighting. (The San Diego Union-Tribune)
Health and environment
COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States
COVID-19 pandemic in New York
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo adds Minnesota, New Mexico, Ohio and Wisconsin to the state's quarantine requirement list, while Delaware is removed. (The Hill)
COVID-19 pandemic in Virginia
Virginia Governor Ralph Northam says that he will increase enforcement of masks and social distancing as cases in the Hampton Roads area spike. (The Virginian-Pilot)
Moderna is expected to start a late stage clinical trial at 87 study locations in the United States for its COVID-19 vaccine on July 27. (Reuters)
COVID-19 pandemic in France
France is expected to make masks compulsory in indoor public spaces. (Reuters)
COVID-19 pandemic in Venezuela
The number of COVID-19 cases in Venezuela surpasses 10,000. (AP)
Mongolia puts five districts under a six-day quarantine after a 15-year-old boy dies of the bubonic plague in the remote Gobi-Altai province amid fears of an epidemic. (AFP via Al Arabiya)
International relations
China–United States relations, 2019–20 Hong Kong protests
U.S. President Donald Trump signs legislation and an executive order that will "hold China accountable" for recent "oppressive actions" in Hong Kong by ending its preferential economic status with the United States. (AP) (Reuters)
Law and crime
Capital punishment
Capital punishment in the United States
The Supreme Court of the United States rules 5–4 to lift the block on four federal executions scheduled for July and August. Convicted murderer Daniel Lewis Lee, whose execution was scheduled for the previous afternoon, is executed by lethal injection at the federal penitentiary in Terre Haute, Indiana. Two more executions are scheduled for later in the week. (The Washington Post)
Capital punishment in Iran, 2019–2020 Iranian protests
Following a social media campaign that generated 7.5 million posts with the hashtag #do_not_execute, the Iranian authorities halt the impending executions of three anti-government protestors who were arrested during street protests in November 2019 in which hundreds of demonstrators were killed. A retrial is ordered. (BBC)
George Floyd protests
George Floyd protests in Kentucky
Nearly 100 people protesting the police killing of Breonna Taylor are arrested outside the home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron. (NBC News)
Politics and elections
2020 United States elections
2020 United States Senate elections
People in Maine, Alabama, and Texas are expected to cast their votes in both regular and run off primaries. (CNN)
Former Auburn football coach Tommy Tuberville defeats former attorney general Jeff Sessions in the Alabama Republican primary. Tuberville will face Democratic incumbent Doug Jones. (Vox)
July 2020 New Zealand National Party leadership election
Todd Muller resigns as leader of the New Zealand National Party citing health and family reasons. A party caucus elects Judith Collins as the party's new leader. (Stuff) (Stuff2)
2020 Belarusian presidential election
The Belarusian election commission bars two prominent opposition candidates to current President Alexander Lukashenko from running in the election, ensuring a victory for Lukashenko. The barred candidates are Viktar Babaryka who was disqualified for an open criminal case against him and Valery Tsepkalo whose signatures on a supporting petition were nullified. (Reuters)
2020 Hong Kong pro-democracy primaries
Exit polls results show a strong support for young pro-democracy candidates, including independent activist Joshua Wong and League of Social Democrats candidate Jimmy Sham. A spokesperson for the Liaison Office of China in Hong Kong says that the election could be in violation of the new security law and could be nullified. (NHK-World)
International students in the United States
The Trump administration reverses its student visa policy, announced on July 6, to deport international students whose courses move fully online. The plan met stiff opposition. At least 59 universities and the attorneys general of 18 states sued to block this directive. Federal district judge Allison Burroughs dismisses the first case brought to court as moot because the federal government has agreed to rescind the policy. (BBC) (USA Today)
Science and technology
UK Digital Media minister Oliver Dowden announces to the House of Commons that the country's mobile providers will be barred from buying 5G equipment from Huawei starting December 31, and will be required to remove it from their networks by 2027. Lord John Browne resigned from his position as chairman of Huawei's UK branch shortly before the announcement. (BBC)
July 13, 2020 (Monday)
edithistorywatch
Armed conflicts and attacks
Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen
The Houthis launch missiles and drones into Saudi Arabia during an overnight attack. The movement claims it successfully hit Saudi warplanes, military installations, an airport and the Jizan oil facility, operated by Aramco. Saudi-led coalition spokesman Turki al-Maliki says they destroyed four missiles and six drones launched against the kingdom from capital of Yemen, Sanaa. (Al Jazeera)
War in Afghanistan; July 2020 Afghanistan attacks
The Taliban attack an intelligence building in Aybak, Samangan Province, leaving 11 people dead and 63 people injured. The attack started with a suicide car bombing at the government compound and finished after gunmen were killed by Afghan security forces. (Reuters)
2020 Armenian–Azerbaijani skirmishes; Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
Several Armenian and Azerbaijani soldiers are killed and/or wounded after a clash at the border of the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhchivan. (Reuters)
Business and economy
Diageo plc announces that Johnnie Walker Scotch whisky will soon be sold in paper bottles. The bottles will be made from wood pulp and will be fully recyclable. A trial run is scheduled for spring 2021. In addition, Diageo is co-launching Pulpex with venture management firm Pilot Lite that will make paper bottles for beverage companies such as Unilever and PepsiCo. (BBC)
Health and environment
COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States
COVID-19 pandemic in California
California Governor Gavin Newsom orders further restrictions and prohibitions on indoor activities, building on previous orders. California has seen a sustained rise in COVID-19 cases in recent weeks, resulting in the state pausing and rolling back some reopening plans. (CNBC)
COVID-19 pandemic in Michigan
Michigan begins tighter restrictions on public face mask usage, including $500 fines for refusal to wear one and the potential loss of business licenses for failure to enforce their usage. (MLive.com)
COVID-19 pandemic in Turkmenistan
State media issues an order from the Ministry of Health mandating that all citizens wear masks to combat "dust", and maintain a distance between people of at least one meter (3 feet). The Turkmen government maintains that the country remains free of COVID-19 but refuses to explain the purpose of these mandates. (CTV News)
International relations
China–United States relations
In response to the United States placing sanctions on Chinese officials for their roles in the internment of Uyghurs, the Chinese Foreign Ministry announces it will place sanctions on several American politicians, such as Senators Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, and the government agency Congressional-Executive Commission on China for "wrong actions". (BBC)
The U.S. State Department formally rejects most of China's maritime claims in the South China Sea. (U.S. Department of State)
Law and crime
Capital punishment in the United States
An appeals court overturns a ruling by a federal judge blocking the execution of convicted murderer Daniel Lewis Lee, who along with Chevie Kehoe, murdered a family during a home invasion in Arkansas in 1996. It will be the first federal execution since 2003. (BBC)
Federal district judge Tanya S. Chutkan blocks the four federal executions scheduled for July and August including that of Daniel Lewis Lee, whose execution was scheduled for later today per the Chicago U.S. Court of Appeals' ruling Sunday. Judge Chutkan said this will allow continuation of the condemned men’s legal challenges to the new lethal injection protocol. She stated scientific evidence before the court overwhelmingly indicates the 2019 protocol is very likely to cause extreme pain and needless suffering during their executions. The federal government is likely to appeal her ruling. (Reuters) (NPR)
Politics and elections
2020 Polish presidential election
The National Electoral Commission announces that incumbent President Andrzej Duda has been re-elected after winning 51.2% of the votes in a second round run-off with challenger Rafał Trzaskowski. (BBC)
Politics of Ivory Coast
Ivory Coast's Vice President Daniel Kablan Duncan resigns days after the death of Prime Minister Amadou Gon Coulibaly. His office says he is leaving for personal reasons. (Reuters)
Hong Kong pro-democracy activist Nathan Law says he is in the United Kingdom after fleeing persecution from a controversial security law implemented by the Hong Kong government. (BBC)
Sports
Washington Redskins name controversy
The Washington Redskins announce they are dropping the team nickname and logo after decades of criticism of them being offensive to Native Americans. The new name will be announced later. (AP) (USA Today)
July 12, 2020 (Sunday)
edithistorywatch
Armed conflicts and attacks
Armenia–Azerbaijan relations
Armenian and Azerbaijani forces exchange fire on the border, leaving three Azeri soldiers dead and five wounded, according to Azerbaijan's Ministry of Defence. No Armenian casualties are reported. (The Eurasian Times) (Armenia Radio)
Business and economy
The McClatchy company, one of the largest and most respected American news publishers, announces that hedge fund Chatham Asset Management won its bankruptcy sale in a court-supervised auction. Chatham, which owns the National Enquirer, has been an investor in the company since 2009. Court confirmation, likely at a hearing on July 24, is required. McClatchy has been burdened by heavy debt from its large pension obligations and the acquisition of newspaper chain Knight Ridder. (Reuters) (The New York Times)
Disasters and accidents
A fire, followed by an explosion, breaks out on the USS Bonhomme Richard at the U.S. Naval base in San Diego, California. At least 18 sailors are currently hospitalized. It is unclear where the fire started or what the source of the explosion was. (The New York Times) (The Hill)
Health and environment
COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 pandemic in Japan, Japan–United States relations
U.S. military officials report 61 cases of COVID-19 at Marine Corps Air Station Futenma and Camp Hansen. Governor of Okinawa Prefecture Denny Tamaki said late on Saturday that "Okinawans are shocked by what we were told", and demanded more action from the U.S. military which has since put the two bases under lockdown. (AP News)
COVID-19 pandemic in Mexico
The death toll in Mexico rises above 35,000, surpassing Italy. (Reuters)
Law and crime
Aftermath of the Sudanese Revolution
Amid a series of reforms, Sudan bans female genital mutilation, decriminalizes apostasy, ends public flogging and lifts a 36-year ban on the consumption of alcohol for non-Muslims, according to Justice Minister Nasreldin Abdelbari. (BBC)
China releases law professor Xu Zhangrun, who had criticized CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), from detention after six days. (Reuters)
Politics and elections
2020 Polish presidential election
The second round of the latest presidential election in Poland takes place. Incumbent President Andrzej Duda faces Mayor of Warsaw Rafał Trzaskowski. (The Guardian)
July 11, 2020 (Saturday)
edithistorywatch
Armed conflicts and attacks
July 2020 Afghanistan attacks
At least six civilians are killed when their vehicle hits a roadside bomb in Ghazni Province, Afghanistan. A provincial government spokesman blames the Taliban though no group claimed responsibility. (AP via Al Arabiya)
Syrian civil war
The United Nations Security Council approves aid deliveries to northwest Syria through one border crossing with Turkey, a day after its authorization for the six-year-long humanitarian operation ended. Russia and China abstain today on this week's fifth attempt to approve this help. (Reuters)
Bosnia and Herzegovina commemorates 25 years since the Srebrenica massacre. (BBC)
Arts and culture
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on The Walt Disney Company
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 pandemic in Florida
Animal Kingdom and Magic Kingdom reopens at Walt Disney World with new safety guidelines despite rising cases in Florida. Masks are expected to be mandatory and capacity is expected to be limited. (CNBC) (The Wall Street Journal)
A sealed copy of the 1985 Nintendo Entertainment System game Super Mario Bros. sells for US$114,000, a world record for a video game. (Nintendo Life)
The World Council of Churches, which counts 350 churches as members, calls on Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to reverse his decision to turn the celebrated Hagia Sophia museum back into a mosque. (BBC)
Disasters and accidents
In the second case in a week in Australia, a surfing teenage boy is killed by a shark near Grafton, New South Wales. (AP News)
A fire breaks out at the Mission San Gabriel Arcángel in San Gabriel, California, US, resulting in the collapse of its roof and considerable damage to the nearly 250-year-old building's interior. (The New York Times)
Health and environment
COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States
COVID-19 pandemic in Louisiana
Louisiana Governor John Bel Edwards issues an executive order requiring people to wear face masks in public. (Axios)
COVID-19 pandemic in New York (state)
The COVID-19 hospitalizations and average three-day death toll in New York reach lower levels for the first time since March. (CBS News)
COVID-19 pandemic in India
COVID-19 pandemic in Karnataka
The Karnataka government announces that Bengaluru will be on lockdown from July 14 to July 22. (Gulf News)
Indian film actor Amitabh Bachchan is hospitalized after testing positive for COVID-19. His son, Abhishek Bachchan, also tests positive. (CNN)
Law and crime
Police respond to a shooting and hostage situation at a pentecostal church in Zuurbekom, Gauteng, South Africa. At least five people are killed. South African police free an undetermined number of hostages, and arrest more than 40 people. Among those arrested were members of the police, defense forces and correctional services. The attackers reportedly were part of a splinter group in a leadership dispute at the long-troubled church. (Reuters) (BBC) (AP)
Politics and elections
2020 Hong Kong pro-democracy primaries
Election starts for pro-democracy politicians and activists to choose representatives to run in the upcoming legislative election in September. (Reuters)
Serbia COVID-19 protests and riots
Serbians protest for a fourth consecutive day; the protest initially started out against the government COVID-19 measures but would morph into anti-government protests. 71 people are arrested. (DW News)
Congolese Justice Minister Celestin Tunda resigns following disputes with President Félix Tshisekedi over Tunda and allies's proposal to allow politicians more control over criminal prosecution cases. (Al Jazeera)
Thousands of protesters march in Khabarovsk, Khabarovsk Krai, Russia, against Thursday's arrest of LDPR governor Sergey Furgal for allegedly organizing the murder of entrepreneurs 15 years ago. (Reuters)
Mali President Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta announces dissolution of the constitutional court in an attempt to calm unrest that saw four people killed in anti-government protests in the capital Bamako on Friday. (Bloomberg) (BBC)
July 10, 2020 (Friday)
edithistorywatch
Armed conflicts and attacks
Malian police throw tear gas and open fire at anti-government protesters occupying the national parliament building and the offices of state broadcaster Office de Radiodiffusion-Télévision du Mali in Bamako. At least one person died from their injuries. (Reuters)
Arts and culture
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan issues a presidential decree converting Istanbul's Hagia Sophia back to a mosque, after a court annulled the 1934 decree that transformed it into a museum. (CNN)
Dame Vera Lynn, who died last month, receives a military funeral in East Sussex, England, on the 80th anniversary of the Battle of Britain. (BBC)
Business and economy
Boycott Chinese products, China–India relations
The Indian government asks e-commerce platforms such as Amazon and Flipkart to display the country of origin on new products listed by sellers on their sites by August 1 and items that were already being sold by October 1 without stipulating a mandatory deadline. The move comes during heightened tensions between India and China following the 2020 China–India skirmishes and a campaign to boycott Chinese-origin products in India. (The Economic Times)
Enlargement of the eurozone
The European Central Bank accepts Bulgaria and Croatia into the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, a mandatory stage for countries that wish to adopt the euro. This is the currency bloc's first major expansion in half a decade. (Reuters)
The U.S. Department of Transportation revokes permission to Pakistan International Airlines to conduct charter flights to the U.S., citing concerns by the Federal Aviation Administration over pilot certifications. (Reuters)
Disasters and accidents
Venice, Italy, tests the MOSE system of 78 mobile floodgates for the first time. Construction of MOSE was authorized by Comitatone, the city's Venetian Lagoon committee, in April 2003. Commissioner Elisabetta Spitz said the project still needs another 18 months of testing. In November 2019, Venice was hit by the worst floods in half a century. (BBC)
Tropical Storm Fay makes landfall in New Jersey, US, causing tropical storm force winds over Delaware, New Jersey, and Coastal New York. Flooding closed several roads. (Weather Channel)
Health and environment
Authorities in Kazakhstan deny a report published by Chinese officials alleging that the country is experiencing an outbreak of "unknown pneumonia" potentially deadlier than COVID-19. (CNN)
Law and crime
ABS-CBN franchise renewal controversy
Members of the Philippine House Committee on Legislative Franchises vote against the franchise renewal of the ABS-CBN Corporation, the country's largest media conglomerate. (Reuters via The Guardian)
COVID-19 pandemic in France
The bus driver who was left brain dead after being attacked by passengers who refused to wear face masks in Bayonne, France, dies of his injuries. (BBC)
Special Counsel investigation (2017–2019)
U.S. President Donald Trump commutes the sentence of longtime friend and adviser Roger Stone on seven felony crimes days before Stone was to report to a federal prison to serve a 40-month term. (The New York Times) (Fox News)
Chinese intelligence activity abroad
A court in Paris sentences to jail Pierre-Marie H., 69, and Henri M., 73, two former agents from the foreign intelligence service after convicting them of sharing secrets with China, for a 12-year sentence and an eight-year term respectively. (Washington Examiner)
Politics and elections
2020 Singaporean general election
Voting begins in Singapore's latest general election. The ruling People's Action Party is projected to maintain its majority, albeit with the oppositional Workers' Party gaining seats. (Reuters)
More July 2020 events...
Time: 13:04 UTC|Day: 16 July
◀	July 2020	▶
S	M	T	W	T	F	S
 	 	 	1	2	3	4
5	6	7	8	9	  10  	  11  
  12  	  13  	  14  	  15  	  16  	17	18
19	20	21	22	23	24	25
26	27	28	29	30	31	 
More July 2020 events...   
About this page 
Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia
Ongoing events
Business
Coronavirus recession
Disasters
COVID-19 pandemic
2018–20 Southern Africa drought
2019–20 European windstorm season
2019–20 locust infestation
2020 Atlantic hurricane season
2020 North Indian Ocean cyclone season
2020 Pacific hurricane season
2020 Pacific typhoon season
2020 wildfire season
Yemeni famine
Politics
Afghan peace process
Bulgarian protests
Hachalu Hundessa riots
Hong Kong protests
Iraqi protests
Kashmir autonomy status
Libyan peace process
Persian Gulf crisis
Post-Brexit diplomatic talks
United States police reform protests
Venezuelan presidential crisis (protests)
edit section
Elections and referendums
Recent
July
5: Croatia, Parliament
5: Dominican Republic, President, Chamber of Deputies, Senate
10: Singapore, Parliament
12: Poland, President (2nd round)
15: North Macedonia, Parliament
Upcoming
July
19: Syria, Parliament
edit section
Trials
Recently concluded
Congo DR: Vital Kamerhe
France: François Fillon
Iran: Fariba Adelkhah
Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev
Philippines: Maria Ressa
Russia: Paul Whelan
Ongoing
Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan
Cambodia: Kem Sokha
Guatemala: Otto Pérez Molina, Roxana Baldetti, Juan Carlos Monzón and others
Greece: Nikolaos Michaloliakos
Israel: Faina Kirschenbaum, Benjamin Netanyahu
Malaysia: Najib Razak
Malta: Murder of Daphne Caruana
Philippines: Leila de Lima, Marcos vs. Robredo electoral protest
Russia: Mikhail Yefremov
South Africa: Jacob Zuma
Spain: Bárcenas affair, Catalan police leadership
United States: Fat Leonard scandal, Varsity Blues scandal, North Korean Embassy in Madrid raid, 6ix9ine
International: The Gambia v. Myanmar
Upcoming
Guatemala: Álvaro Colom, Manuel Baldizón, Juan Alberto Fuentes
Japan: Carlos Ghosn
Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi
Lesotho: Maesiah Thabane
United States: Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Elizabeth Holmes, Meng Wanzhou, R. Kelly, Nikolas Cruz, Ghislaine Maxwell
Zimbabwe: Ignatius Chombo
edit section
Sport
Association football
2020 Major League Soccer season
UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying
2019–20 UEFA Champions League
2019–20 UEFA Europa League
2019–20 La Liga
2019–20 Premier League
2019–20 Serie A
2019–20 Bundesliga
Women's association football
2019–20 Champions League
2019–20 Division 1 Féminine
2019–20 FA WSL
2019–20 Frauen-Bundesliga
2020 NWSL Challenge Cup
Baseball
2020 MLB season
2020 NPB season
Softball
Basketball
2019–20 EuroLeague
2019–20 NBA season
Golf
2020 European Tour
2019–20 PGA Tour
Ice hockey
2019–20 NHL season
2019–20 KHL season
Motorsport
2020 Formula One Championship
2020 NASCAR Cup Series
Rugby sevens
2019–20 World Rugby Sevens Series
2019–20 World Rugby Women's Sevens Series
Rugby union
2019–20 European Rugby Champions Cup
2019–20 Premiership Rugby
2019–20 Pro14
2019–20 Top 14
Other sports seasons
2020 AFL season
2019–20 international cricket season
2019–20 curling season
2019–20 figure skating season
2019–20 snooker season
More details – current sports events
edit section
Recent deaths
July 2020
15: Toke Talagi
14: Daniel Lewis Lee
13: Grant Imahara
13: Zindzi Mandela
12: Mohamed Hashi
12: Hassan Abshir Farah
12: Kelly Preston
11: Jack Charlton
11: Edward Kmiec
10: Vikas Dubey
10: Paik Sun-yup
9: Park Won-soon
8: Amadou Gon Coulibaly
8: Munah E. Pelham-Youngblood
8: Naya Rivera
7: Chynybaĭ Tursunbekov
6: Mary Kay Letourneau
6: Charlie Daniels
6: Ennio Morricone
5: Nick Cordero
5: Bettina Gilois
3: Earl Cameron
3: Saroj Khan
2: Chiu Chuang-huan
2: Ángela Jeria
1: Hugh Downs
1: Georg Ratzinger
June 2020
30: Ida Haendel
29: Johnny Mandel
29: Benny Mardones
29: Carl Reiner
27: Pete Carr
27: Freddy Cole
27: Linda Cristal
26: Kelly Asbury
26: Milton Glaser
25: Huey
25: Joe Sinnott
22: Steve Bing
22: Joel Schumacher
20: William Millerson
19: Ian Holm
19: Carlos Ruiz Zafón
18: Jules Sedney
18: Vera Lynn
17: Jean Kennedy Smith
16: Eduardo Cojuangco Jr.
edit section
Ongoing conflicts
Africa
Algeria, Libya and Tunisia
Maghreb insurgency
Cameroon
Anglophone Crisis
Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria
Boko Haram insurgency
Central African Republic
Civil War
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Kivu conflict
Allied Democratic Forces insurgency
Ituri conflict
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
Libya
Second Civil War
American intervention in Libya
Turkish intervention in Libya
Mali
Mali War
Mozambique
Insurgency in Cabo Delgado
Nigeria
Communal conflicts in Nigeria
Somalia
Civil war
South Sudan
Ethnic violence (South Sudanese Civil War)
Sudan
War in Darfur
South Kordofan conflict
Sudanese nomadic conflicts
Americas
Colombia
Colombian conflict
Mexico
Mexican War on Drugs
Peru
Internal conflict in Peru
Asia-Pacific
Afghanistan
Afghanistan War
China
Xinjiang conflict
India
Naxalite–Maoist insurgency
Insurgency in Northeast India
India and Pakistan
Kashmir conflict
Border skirmishes
Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines
Moro conflict
Cross border attacks in Sabah
Indonesia
Papua conflict
Myanmar
Internal conflict in Myanmar
Kachin conflict
Karen conflict
Rohingya conflict
Pakistan
Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Insurgency in Balochistan
Philippines
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
Philippine Drug War
Thailand
South Thailand insurgency
Europe
Armenia and Azerbaijan
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
Georgia
Abkhaz–Georgian conflict
Georgian–Ossetian conflict
Russia
Chechen–Russian conflict
Ukraine
War in Donbass
Russo-Ukrainian War
Middle East
Egypt
Sinai terror attacks
Iran and the Persian Gulf
Iran–Israel proxy conflict
Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict
Iraq
American-led intervention in Iraq
Iranian intervention in Iraq
Iraq and Syria (map)
International military intervention against ISIL
Israel and Gaza
Israel and Syria
Israeli-Syrian border conflict
Syria
American-led intervention in Syria
Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War
Turkey
Kurdish–Turkish conflict
Yemen and Saudi Arabia
Yemeni Civil War
Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen
Saudi Arabian–Yemeni border conflict
Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts
edit section
Events by month
[hide]
2020 January February March April May June July
2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December
2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1994 July August September October November December
Content listings
Types
Overviews Featured content Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Spoken articles
Topics
Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology
Places, people and times
Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines centuries decades
Indices
A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification
Categories: 2020 by dayCurrent events portal2020Current eventsHistory portals
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
PortalTalk
ReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Español
中文
فارسی
العربية
हिन्दी
Тоҷикӣ
اردو
سنڌي
97 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 January 2020, at 08:32 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Nils-Udo
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Nils-Udo" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Nils-Udo
Nils-Udo (1993).jpg
Nils-Udo in 1993
Born	1937
Lauf an der Pegnitz, Germany
Nationality	German
Known for	Sculpture; photography
Movement	Environmental art and Land art
Nils-Udo (born 1938) is a German artist from Bavaria who has been creating environmental art since the 1960s when he moved away from painting and the studio and began to work with, and in, nature. He began in the 1960s as a painter on traditional surfaces, in Paris, but moved to his home country in Bavaria and started to plant creations, putting them in Nature's hands to develop, and eventually disappear.[1] As his work became more ephemeral, Udo introduced photography as part of his art to document and share it. Perhaps the best known example of his work for the general public is the cover design for Peter Gabriel's OVO.[2] Nils-Udo seeks to offer a mutualist vision wherein nature as environment is an omnipresent backdrop. In revealing the diversity in a specific environment, he establishes links between human and natural history, between nature and humanity that are always there, yet seldom recognized.[3]


Contents
1	Selected works and projects
1.1	OVO (2000)
1.2	Stone-Age-Man (2001)
1.3	Radeau d'Automne (2013-2014)
1.4	Other Important Works
2	From His Own Words
3	Bibliography
4	Gallery
5	See also
6	References
7	External links
Selected works and projects
OVO (2000)
Peter Gabriel contacted Nils Udo to create an installation for the cover for his new album OVO. Udo created a nest-like structure supported by tree trunks, which made it very heavy. Inside the nest lay the child of a Real World (Studio in England where album was recorded) employee (The child, Josh, is the son of Susie Millns at Real World’s Art department). The photograph was taken and then the installation was moved into Peter Gabriels's garden nearby. Finally due to issues of what to do with it the gardener set the structure on fire. This did not upset Udo as his work is transient and there is a photograph that keeps the artwork still living.[4] Its called OVO because it has an OVO form.

Stone-Age-Man (2001)
Stone-Age-Man is a monumental sculpture in Wittgensteiner-Sauerland, Germany. Udo creates the effect of an ancient temple by installing in the middle of the structure an enormous cube of rock framed by a monumental architectural trunk form made out of wood. The quartzite monolith weighs almost 150 tons and, integrated into the peaceful grandeur of the forest, it forms a monument and memorial in its own right: its size, its timeless association with the earth, and its uniqueness. When exposed to this powerful entity, the viewer experiences his/her own temporality and vulnerability.[5]

Radeau d'Automne (2013-2014)
The community of d’Éguzon-Chantôme and Crozant had the desire of local authorities to initiate artistic and cultural projects in a remote rural areas based on the environmental qualities of its sites. Udo proposed Radeau d' Automne as a monumental sculpture designed with natural materials. In the shape of a stylized maple half-leaf, 6.80 meters long and 3.90 meters high, the work is built in round trunks with light chestnut wood, assembled "with the old "tenons, mortises and ankles. This traditional, solid and aesthetic blend, as well as the use of a local essence and strong identity, reinforces the link to the territory. It was here to give shape to a space, the space of the valley of the Creuse, marked by the history of pictorial currents of the nineteenth century. and 20th century. and thus exposing himself to a new reading, to a new look: the wooden raft and water, leaf reflecting on the river at the foot of the granite ruins and recalling the steep ridges of the surrounding landscape.[6] When asked about this work Udo responded “Even if I work parallel to nature and only intervene with the greatest possible care, a basic internal contradiction remains. It is a contradiction that underlies all of my work, which itself can’t escape the inherent fatality of our existence. It harms what it touches : the virginity of nature… To realize what is possible and latent in Nature, to literally realize what has never existed, utopia becomes reality. A second life suffices. The event has taken place. I have only animated it and made it visible.” [7]

Other Important Works
Tower: Benthelm sandstone, Nordhorn, Germany, 1982[1]
Waterhouse: spruce trunks, birch branches, willow switches and sod on tidal flats,Waddensee mudflats, Holland, 1982[1]
Chestnut leaf, vetch flowers, pond, Vassiviere, Limousin, France, 1986[3]
Bindweed flowers held in their journey on a stream by a stick dam. Reunion, Indian Ocean, 1990.[3]
Robinia Leaf Swing: Robinia leaf halved, ash twigs, Valle de Sella, Italy, 1992.[3]
The Blue Flower: Landscape for heinrich von Ofterdingen, planting of 10,000 wildflowers in Munich, Germany, 1993-96.[3]
Tadpole Willow: Fern leaves and mud, view of site specific work in Marchiennes, France, 1994.[1]
Root-Sculpture, Mexico City, 1995[3]
Dune Edge: pampas grass,
1330- sand, wind—Namibia, 2001
Lost in the immensity of the mountainous red sand dunes of Namibia. One of the oldest deserts in the world. Not a breath of wind, not a sound. The tracks of a solitary gazelle crisscross the huge immaculate hollow at the foot of one gigantic dune. The shadow of late afternoon sun rapidly draws closer. - Nils Udo[1]
The Nest: National Garden Show, Munich, Germany, 2005 [8]
Sella Nest: Spruce logs and white marble, Valle di Sella, Italy, 2008[8]
Entrance: Mountain Bluets, Pigment print 135x180 cm , Pyrenees , 2018[9]
From His Own Words
"Moving from Paris to rural Bavaria, perceiving the endangerment of nature, its growing destruction, I lived through a profound change of awareness."[1]
"Being a part of nature, being embedded in it and living on it, it appeared to me that acting in compliance with the laws of nature was something self-evident and necessary for survival."[1]
"[My art is a] documentation of a dying world experience. To bear witness, at the last possible moment, to a now seemingly anachronistic perception of life, an attitude that can barely be understood, even by those willing to do so."[3]
"Nature is still complete and inexhaustible in her most remote refuges, her magic still real. At any time, meaning any season, in all weathers, in things great and small. Always. Potential Utopias are under every stone, on every leaf and behind every tree, in the clouds and in the wind. Pitting poetry against the inhuman river of time"[10]
"We must realize our responsibility for what is happening, for society. Art always deals with reality. Those who shut their eyes to reality are liars and deprive themselves of any meaningful possibility of acting in society and (in the history of) art. What we are working for, if not for man, for society? Despite clear-sighted pessimism - we must hope in order to live. What counts for me is that my actions, Utopia-like, fuse life and art into each other."[10]
"Everything perceivable through human senses takes part--Natural space experienced through hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting and touching. By means of the smallest possible interventions, living, three-dimensional natural space is reorganized, unlocked and put under tension."[1]
Bibliography
Nils-Udo: Art In Nature, 2002, ISBN 2-08-010891-3
Le maïs, 1996, ISBN 2-908650-32-0
Nids, 2003, ISBN 2-7022-0675-1
Nils-Udo: sur l'eau, 2015, ISBN 978-2-330-05056-6
Gallery
Nordhorn Nils01.JPG
 
Nordhorn Nils04.JPG
 
Habitat - 2006.jpg
 
Rothaargebirge Skulptur01.jpg
 
Nils Udo - Earth Art.jpg
See also
Andy Goldsworthy
Environmental art
Environmental sculpture
Greenmuseum.org
Land art
References
 "Artist/Naturalist Nils Udo". www.morning-earth.org. Archived from the original on 2010-07-07. Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 Hypergallery.com profile
 "Sculpture.org". www.sculpture.org. Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 "Ovo » Real World Galleries". realworldgalleries.com. Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 netzpepper. "Stone-Age-Man Nils Udo Kühude - waldskulpturenweg.de". www.waldskulpturenweg.com (in German). Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 "Le Radeau d'Automne - Nils Udo - Ministère de la Culture". www.culture.gouv.fr (in French). Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 "Nils Udo contemporary art installation and video — Radeau d'Automne – TLmagazine". TLmagazine. 2013-11-12. Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 "ART IN THE URBAN SPACE - Nils Udo". Nils Udo. Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 "Art in nature - Nils Udo". Nils Udo. Retrieved 2018-11-27.
 "Nils-Udo-Interview by John K. Grande". www.ecologicalart.org. Retrieved 2018-11-27.
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nils-Udo.
Nils-Udo
Nils-Udo on artnet
black flamingo agency represents Nils-Udo for commissioned work
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BNF: cb125390859 (data) GND: 121204243 ISNI: 0000 0001 2140 4547 LCCN: nr94015300 NDL: 00880196 PIC: 300449 RKD: 232343 SNAC: w63f6tcc SUDOC: 031827039 ULAN: 500196272 VIAF: 243667055 WorldCat Identities: lccn-nr94015300
Categories: 1937 birthsLiving peoplePeople from Nürnberger LandPhotographers from BavariaGerman sculptorsGerman male sculptorsGerman installation artistsLand artists
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Deutsch
Français
Català
Nederlands
Español
مصرى
Edit links
This page was last edited on 3 July 2020, at 00:45 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 Page semi-protected
Wikipedia:Contents
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Contents Overviews Outlines Lists Portals A–Z index Glossaries Categories Indices
Reference Culture Geography Health History Human activities Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology
Explore Wikipedia's contents
For Wikipedia’s internal directory, see Wikipedia:Directories and indexes.
Shortcuts
WP:START
WP:EXPLORE

Contents
1	Main subject classifications
2	Curated article collections
3	Third-party classification systems
4	Reference collections
5	Special format collections
6	Collections of articles
7	Collections of articles by quality or popularity
Wikipedia is a compendium of the world's knowledge. If you know what you are looking for, type it into Wikipedia's search box. If, however, you need a bird's eye view of what Wikipedia has to offer, see its main contents pages below, which in turn list more specific pages.

Main subject classifications
Wikipedia's main navigation subsystems (overviews, outlines, lists, portals, glossaries, categories, and indices) are each divided into the following subject classifications:

Reference works – compendiums of information, usually of a specific type, compiled in a book for ease of reference. That is, the information is intended to be quickly found when needed.
Culture – encompasses the social behavior and norms found in human societies, as well as the knowledge, beliefs, arts, laws, customs, capabilities and habits of the individuals in these groups.
Geography – field of science devoted to the study of the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of the Earth and planets.
Health – state of physical, mental and social well-being.
History – the past as it is described in written documents, and the study thereof.
Human activities – the various activities done by people. For instance it includes leisure, entertainment, industry, recreation, war, and exercise.
Mathematics – the study of topics such as quantity (numbers), structure, space, and change. It evolved through the use of abstraction and logical reasoning, from counting, calculation, measurement, and the systematic study of the shapes and motions of physical objects.
Natural science – branch of science concerned with the description, prediction, and understanding of natural phenomena, based on empirical evidence from observation and experimentation.
People – plurality of persons considered as a whole, as is the case with an ethnic group or nation.
Philosophy – study of general and fundamental questions about existence, knowledge, values, reason, mind, and language.
Religions – social-cultural systems of designated behaviors and practices, morals, worldviews, texts, sanctified places, prophecies, ethics, or organizations, that relates humanity to supernatural, transcendental, or spiritual elements.
Society – group of individuals involved in persistent social interaction, or a large social group sharing the same geographical or social territory, typically subject to the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions; a given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent of members.
Technology – the sum of techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation.
Curated article collections
Overview articles
Overview articles summarize in prose a broad topic like biology, and also have illustrations and links to subtopics like cell biology, biographies like Carl Linnaeus, and other related articles like Human Genome Project.

Wikipedia:Contents/Overviews lists overview articles from covered fields in a single page.
Outline pages
Outline pages have trees of topics in an outline format, which in turn are linked to further outlines and articles providing more detail. Outlines show how important subtopics relate to each other based on how they are arranged in the tree, and they are useful as a more condensed, non-prose alternative to overview articles.

Wikipedia:Contents/Outlines is a comprehensive list of "Outline of __" pages, organized by subject. It is itself an outline, that links (almost) exclusively to other outlines.
Outline of academic disciplines covers subjects studied in college or university, and provides links to prose overview articles and their corresponding outlines.
Outline of knowledge is the top-level outline, its subject being the broadest one of all. It is the ancestor of all other outlines, and they branch out from it, in successive levels.
Vital articles
Main page: Wikipedia:Vital articles
Vital articles are lists of subjects for which Wikipedia should have corresponding high-quality articles. They serve as centralized watchlists to track the status of Wikipedia's most important articles.

Vital articles level 1 – 10 most important articles
Vital articles level 2 – 100 most important articles
Vital articles level 3 – 1,000 most important articles
Vital articles level 4 – 10,000 most important articles
Vital articles level 5 – 50,000 most important articles
Third-party classification systems
Various third-party classification systems have been mapped to Wikipedia articles, which can be accessed from these pages:

Library of Congress Classification
List of Dewey Decimal classes
Figurative system of human knowledge
Outline of Roget's Thesaurus
Propædia
Tree of knowledge system
Universal Decimal Classification
Reference collections
Wikipedia has several types of pages which provide content in a non-prose form, for reference purposes.

List pages
List pages enumerate items of a particular type, such as the List of sovereign states or List of South Africans. Wikipedia has "lists of lists" when there are too many items to fit on a single page, when the items can be sorted in different ways, or as a way of navigating lists on a topic (for example Lists of countries and territories or Lists of people). There are several ways to find lists:

Wikipedia:Contents/Lists – A limited single-page collection of lists and lists of lists
List of lists of lists – A broad single-page collection of lists of lists
Category:Lists – Browse lists comprehensively via the multi-page Wikipedia category system
Timelines
Timelines list events chronologically, sometimes including links to articles with more detail. There are several ways to find timelines:

List of timelines has a long single-page collection
Category:Wikipedia timelines has a comprehensive multi-page collection via the Wikipedia category system
Of particular interest may be:

List of centuries
List of decades
List of historical anniversaries – e.g. events on January 1 of any year
Category:Graphical timelines – graphical timelines in the category and subcategories, arranged alphabetically
Glossaries
Glossaries are lists of terms with definitions. Wikipedia includes hundreds of alphabetical glossaries; they can be found two ways:

Wikipedia:Contents/Glossaries – A single-page list of glossaries
Category:Wikipedia glossaries – Browse glossaries comprehensively via the Wikipedia category system
Bibliographies
Bibliographies list sources on a given topic, for verification or further reading outside Wikipedia:

Wikipedia:List of bibliographies is a list of bibliographies
Category:Wikipedia bibliographies has a complete multi-page listing of bibliographies on Wikipedia
Category:Discographies
Discographies catalog the sound recordings of individual artists or groups.

Category:Discographies has a complete multi-page listing
Special format collections
Portals
Portals contain featured articles and images, news, categories, excerpts of key articles, links to related portals, and to-do lists for editors. There are two ways to find portals:

Wikipedia:Contents/Portals – A single-page list of portals
Category:Portals – Browse portals comprehensively via the Wikipedia category system.
Spoken articles
Growing collections of Wikipedia articles are starting to become available as spoken word recordings as well.

Category:Spoken articles – an organized list of all spoken articles
Wikipedia:Spoken articles – some general information about the spoken article technology
Collections of articles
Category system
Wikipedia's collection of category pages is a classified index system. It is automatically generated from category tags at the bottoms of articles and most other pages. Nearly all of the articles available so far on the website can be found through these subject indexes.

If you are simply looking to browse articles by topic, there are three top-level pages to choose from:

Category:Main topic classifications – probably what you are looking for: Arts, History, Technology, etc.
Wikipedia:Contents/Categories – a hand-crafted list of first- and second-level topic categories
For biographies, see Category:People.

Category:Contents is technically at the top of the category hierarchy, but contains many categories useful to editors but not readers. Special:Categories lists every category alphabetically.

Alphabetical lists of articles
Wikipedia's alphabetical article indexes

Special:Allpages lists all of the current pages in Wikipedia.
Wikipedia:Contents/A–Z index provides an easy way to skip to a particular part of the alphabet in the list of all articles.
Lists of alphabetical indexes
Category:Wikipedia indexes – alphabetical list of topic indexes
Wikipedia:Contents/Indices – indexes sorted by topic area
Current history entries
You can help us keep Wikipedia up to date! The list below is for encyclopedia entries that describe and pertain to events happening on a current basis.

2020 – major events this year
2020 in politics and government  –major current political news and developments
2020 in science and technology  –major current news on science findings and technology developments
Portal:Current events – featured current events and related project activities
Category:2020-related timelines
Category:2020 by country
Deaths in 2020 – lists notable people who died this year
Category:Contemporary history by country
Collections of articles by quality or popularity
Featured content
Featured content is the best Wikipedia has to offer, via vigorous peer review. Presented by type:

Featured articles · Featured lists · Featured pictures · Featured topics
Most popular articles
Wikipedia:Top 5000 pages (of the last week)
Content listings
Types
Overviews Featured content Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Spoken articles
Topics
Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology
Places, people and times
Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines centuries decades
Indices
A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification
Categories: Wikipedia directoriesWikipedia contents
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Project pageTalk
ReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikiversity

Languages
Español
العربية
فارسی
हिन्दी
Bahasa Melayu
中文
پښتو
Русский
سنڌي
33 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 30 June 2020, at 16:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Francesco Alidosi
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

Portrait medal of Cardinal Francesco degli Alidosi
Francesco Alidosi (1455 – 24 May 1511) was an Italian cardinal and condottiero. He accompanied Giuliano della Rovere to France in 1494, and continued in favor when Della Rovere was elected pope, becoming Pope Julius II. Alidosi was elected as bishop of Mileto in 1504, and then transferred to the see of Pavia on 26 March 1505. He occupied the seat until his death in 1511.


Contents
1	Early life
2	Cardinal-priest
3	Accusation of treason
4	Death
5	Personality
6	Portrayals in fiction
7	References
8	Further reading
Early life
Born at Castel del Rio, he was the third son of Giovanni Alidosi, lord of Castel del Rio. He went to France with Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere, the future Pope Julius II, in 1494. When Della Rovere was elected pope, he became his secretary and main collaborator, and was appointed papal chamberlain, then treasurer.[1]

Cardinal-priest

Portrait by Raphael
Though many cardinals opposed the promotion, in 1505 Alidosi was created cardinal-priest of Santi Nereo e Achilleo, opting for the title of S. Cecilia on 11 August 1506. He served as intermediary between Michelangelo Buonarroti and Pope Julius II and, in 1506, signed on behalf of the pope the contract for the ceiling frescoes of the Sistine Chapel, later doing the same for the statue of the Pope in Bologna. He also served as Cardinal protector of England within the college. He was a protector of Desiderius Erasmus and patron of the arts.[1]

Julius II placed great confidence in him, finding him to be an energetic and shrewd collaborator in his political plans. On 22 September 1508 the cardinal went to Viterbo to visit the Pope, who gave the legation in Bologna to Card
1657- nal Ippolito d'Este of Ferrara. The following November, the pope recalled Cardinal Alidosi from the legation.[1]

After taking possession of the legation in Bologna on 27 June 1508, he ordered Alberto Castelli, Innocenzo Ringhieri, Sallustio Guidotti and Bartolomeo Magnani to be strangled. They were accused of "having supported a conspiracy to favor the Bentivoglio", and for having worked with the Venetians against the pope. More than thirty other persons, supporters of the Bentivoglio, were also executed. These actions unleashed a great indignation among the Bolognese.

Named legate in Romagna and Marche in early 1509, he took possession of Ravenna on 29 May 1509 and left his brother Obizzo as governor. He was sent as envoy to the king of France and arrived on 19 June 1509, together with Cardinal François Guillaume de Castelnau-Clermont-Ludève at Mantua. The king of France nominated him as bishop of Cremona without papal approval. On 4 January 1510 the cardinal was recalled to Rome in order to answer to Pope Julius II about the complaints of the Bolognese.[1]

Some theorize the pope recalled Cardinal Alidosi in order to make use of his experience to negotiate peace with Venice. An agreement was reached on 24 February 1510. After that the Pope was forced to take a more accommodating attitude towards King Louis XII of France, Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I and the Duke of Ferrara to ensure the independence of the Catholic Church and the freedom of Italy from foreigners.[1]

Accusation of treason
In April 1510, many Bolognese notables were shocked to learn the pope returned the legation of Bologna to Cardinal Alidosi. They suspected him of dealing with the French during the fight against Venice. On 7 October 1510, while at the papal field near Modena, Francesco Maria I della Rovere, Duke of Urbino, had the cardinal captured, handcuffed and led back to Bologna escorted by 150 horsemen. Outside the San Felice gate, twelve balestrieri removed the handcuffs and led him to a public square. Here he was accused of high treason.[1]

The Duke of Urbino and citizens of Bologna were hoping he would be punished. Instead, the pope allowed him to defend himself, and, finding the accusations unjustified, ruled in his favor. Cardinal Alidosi was named apostolic administrator of the see of Bologna on 18 October 1510, a post which he occupied until his death. On 28 October 1510, Cardinal Alidosi was again taken prisoner by the Duke of Urbino for treason. The pope soon had him freed again and reinstated his honors.[1]

On 14 May 1511, the pope moved his residence from Bologna to Ravenna for security reasons, lodging in the Benedictine monastery of San Vitale. The supporters of the Bentivoglio and those who opposed the power of the church revolted immediately. At about 10 p.m. on 20 May, a disguised Cardinal Alidosi escaped to Castel del Rio, taking all of value that he could carry. This action prompted Francesco Maria della Rovere, at the gates of the city, to abandon the field, along with all the artillery, nearly all the provisions, and numerous flags. On 23 May Gian Giacomo Trivulzio, head of the French army, entered Bologna with the Bentivoglio.[1]

The pope notified the cardinals of the loss of the city, and charged the duke of Urbino and the citizens of treason. He asked the duke to be executed, but Francesco Maria responded by charging Alidosi with treason. From Castel del Rio, the cardinal went to Ravenna to give his version. He was accompanied by his brother-in-law, Guido Vaini, and a legatine guard of 100 horsemen. Pope Julius II determined that the traitor had been the duke of Urbino.[1]

Death
On 24 May 1511 the duke had an audience with the Pope. He was reproached sourly, and exited with eight of his faithfuls. He went to the lodgings of Cardinal Alidosi, who was staying with Cardinal Marco Vigero, near the church of San Vitale in Ravenna. At the same time, the cardinal, accompanied by his guard, was heading out for the apartments of the Pope, who had invited him to supper. The cardinal saluted the Duke, and a youngster in the Duke's retinue dismounted his horse angrily and advanced towards the cardinal. Taking the bridle of the mule that the cardinal was riding, he stabbed the cardinal in the side. The cardinal fell off the mule, and once on the ground, a captain cut the cardinal's cheek and one of his ears with a dagger, while Filippo Doria struck a mortal blow in his head.

One historian notes, "'A favourite has no friends,' -- particularly a favourite of the type of Alidosi -- so that many persons, including the Legate's own servants, looked on unconcernedly upon this murder of an unpopular Churchman in broad daylight."[2]

The cardinal's remains were honored by Pope Julius II with solemn exequies in the cathedral of Ravenna, where they were interred. When the cathedral was demolished in 1745, Gaspare Desiderio Martinetti, a physician, gave the cardinal's skull to the Benedictines of St. Vitale, so that it would not get mixed with other bones. From them, it passed to the Classense Library and was exposed to the public. Later, the legate, Cardinal Agostino Rivarola, had it removed and reinterred. From a recognition made on 20 June 1968, the traces of cleaving that he received on the head could still be noticed. In the cathedral of Imola, there is a cenotaph surmounted by the effigy of the cardinal in a bas-relief, and under it, a marble plaque that remembers him and others of his family.[3]

Personality
Alidosi was known for his cruelty. Cardinal Pietro Bembo described him with these words: "Faith meant nothing to him, nor religion, nor trustworthiness, nor shame, and there was nothing in him that was holy."[4]

Portrayals in fiction
Francesco Alidosi is a character in the 2011 television series Borgia. He is portrayed by Matt Di Angelo and is depicted as the lover of Cardinal della Rovere.[5][non-primary source needed] The rumor dates from his lifetime.[6]

References
 "Alidosi, Francesco, detto il Cardinal di Pavia". Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani - Volume 2 (in Italian). Treccani. 1960. Retrieved 6 July 2020.
 Herbert M. Vaughan, B.A., The Medici Popes (Leo X and Clement VII), London: Methuen & Co., p. 64-65
 The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church – Biographical Dictionary – Consistory of December 1, 1505
 Vaughan, Herbert M. (2013). The Medici Popes: Leo X and Clement VII. Read Books Limited. pp. 83–85. ISBN 978-1-4474-8162-1.
 Borgia Season 2, episode 11: "The Seven Sorrows"
 Christopher Hibbert (17 July 2012). The House of Medici: Its Rise and Fall (Kindle Location 3417). HarperCollins. Kindle Edition.
Further reading
Wilkie, William E. 1974. The cardinal protectors of England. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-20332-5.
Portals
Access related topics	
P vip.svgBiography portal046CupolaSPietro.jpgCatholicism portalFlag of Italy.svgItaly portal
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
GND: 129911739 VIAF: 33090204 WorldCat Identities: viaf-33090204
Categories: 1455 births1511 deathsPeople from the Province of BolognaItalian cardinals16th-century Roman Catholic bishopsCondottieri
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Latina
Deutsch
Français
Español
Italiano
Nederlands
한국어
Polski
Bahasa Indonesia
4 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 16 July 2020, at 13:26 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Help
Search results
Jump to navigationJump to search
biggest book
Results 1 – 20 of 27,584
The page "Biggest book" does not exist. You can ask for it to be created, but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered.
Jyoti Amge
Economic Times. 15 April 2020. Jyoti Amge on IMDb World's Smallest Woman, Jyoti Amge, releases the World's Biggest Book in Jaipur City Rediff Slide Show
8 KB (477 words) - 23:41, 9 July 2020
The Biggest Little Farm
11, 2018. "'Green Book' boosts awards season prospects with TIFF audience award win". Screen Daily, September 16, 2018. "The Biggest Little Farm announced
11 KB (979 words) - 22:17, 2 June 2020
Anuj Dhar (redirect from India's Biggest Cover-up)
purposes. Bose: Dead/Alive, 2017 miniseries based on Anuj Dhar's book India's Biggest Cover-up Hugh Purcell. "Subhas Chandra Bose: The Afterlife of India's
10 KB (848 words) - 07:44, 15 July 2020
Biggest ball of twine
souvenirs. It was the long-standing holder of the "biggest ball of twine" title in the Guinness Book of World Records, holding the title from its completion
8 KB (912 words) - 07:40, 29 June 2020
Sapna Book House
Sapna Book House is an Indian book store chain and a publisher of books. It is one of the biggest book shops in India. The Limca Book of Records recognised
13 KB (700 words) - 12:02, 18 February 2020
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever is a non-fiction book by Marc Aronson and HP Newquist. The book has 100 short articles on subjects that appeal
2 KB (238 words) - 20:29, 8 October 2019
The Biggest Loser
The Biggest Loser is a reality television format which started with the American TV show The Biggest Loser in 2004. The show centers on overweight and
33 KB (771 words) - 02:41, 5 July 2020
The Biggest Bear
The Biggest Bear is a children's picture book by Lynd Ward, first published in 1952. It was illustrated using casein paint, and won the Caldecott Medal
4 KB (409 words) - 03:26, 23 May 2020
The Jungle Book (2016 film)
The Jungle Book is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed and produced by Jon Favreau, written by Justin Marks and produced by Walt Disney Pictures
127 KB (11,360 words) - 15:45, 14 July 2020
Americanah
Yorkers just selected a book for the entire city to read in America's biggest book club", Business Insider, 16 March 2017. "One Book, One New York | And the
17 KB (1,877 words) - 00:04, 17 June 2020
Grey: Fifty Shades of Grey as Told by Christian (redirect from Grey book)
quantities of the book in order to meet release day demand. An editor for The Bookseller also commented that Grey could become the "biggest book of the year"
11 KB (1,045 words) - 21:36, 8 May 2020
Words of Radiance (redirect from The Stormlight Archive Book 2)
book The Book of Endless Pages?” The book, at 1088 pages, is the maximum printable size of a book for its publisher, Tor Books, making it the biggest
22 KB (2,659 words) - 04:07, 19 June 2020
The Biggest Game in Town
1983, Al Alvarez published, The Biggest Game in Town, a book detailing the 1981 World Series of Poker event. The first book of its kind, it described the
2 KB (96 words) - 21:54, 17 December 2019
Largest organisms (redirect from Biggest animal)
Christopher (2009-04-27). "The World's BIGGEST Brittle Stars!". The Echinoblog. Carwardine, M. 1995. The Guinness Book of Animal Records. Guinness Publishing
145 KB (14,990 words) - 22:09, 8 July 2020
Tablespoon
Retrieved 2016-05-29. Chuck Smothermon (2002). Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Meredith Books. p. 416. Retrieved 9 January 2015
8 KB (981 words) - 13:43, 4 July 2020
Kyobo Book Centre
May 2003, Kyobo Book Centre opened its eighth location (and third in Seoul) in Gangnam. It holds the record of being the biggest book store of the nation
7 KB (785 words) - 18:59, 29 December 2019
Cabbage stew
ISBN 978-1-55832-747-4. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Better Homes & Gardens Cooking. Wiley. 2002.
5 KB (442 words) - 07:07, 11 July 2020
Guinness World Records (redirect from Guinness Book of World Records)
2000 as The Guinness Book of Records and in previous United States editions as The Guinness Book of World Records, is a reference book published annually
41 KB (3,490 words) - 06:04, 16 July 2020
List of biggest box-office bombs
Harlin's pirate pic Cutthroat Island -- listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the biggest bomb of all time -- Sahara, The Adventures of Pluto Nash and
115 KB (6,104 words) - 13:47, 2 July 2020
Sandie (cookie)
Holiday Cookies". Vogue. Retrieved June 20, 2017. McConnell, S. (2003). Biggest Book of Cookies. Better Homes & Gardens. Better Homes and Gardens Books. p
4 KB (381 words) - 18:05, 5 June 2020
Results from sister projects

Chinese Merry Tales (1909)/4
the Biggest Volumes May Be 1955200Chinese Merry Tales — IV. How Useful the Biggest Volumes May BeY. T. Woo1909 ​ Chapter IV.—How Useful the Biggest Volumes
 Texts from Wikisource
Travels (book)
to sit back comfortably and complain about how they are doing it. The biggest problem between the sexes was the tendency to objectify the opposite sex
 Quotes from Wikiquote
Using Wikibooks/Donating a Book to Wikibooks
news reports, blogs, or other types of media. The book should be released under the GFDL. The biggest hurdle to most donations is copyright issues. Wikibooks
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)

Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Special pageSearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
Special pages
Printable version

Languages
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Help
Search results
Jump to navigationJump to search
biggest book
Results 1 – 20 of 27,584
The page "Biggest book" does not exist. You can ask for it to be created, but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered.
Jyoti Amge
Economic Times. 15 April 2020. Jyoti Amge on IMDb World's Smallest Woman, Jyoti Amge, releases the World's Biggest Book in Jaipur City Rediff Slide Show
8 KB (477 words) - 23:41, 9 July 2020
The Biggest Little Farm
11, 2018. "'Green Book' boosts awards season prospects with TIFF audience award win". Screen Daily, September 16, 2018. "The Biggest Little Farm announced
11 KB (979 words) - 22:17, 2 June 2020
Anuj Dhar (redirect from India's Biggest Cover-up)
purposes. Bose: Dead/Alive, 2017 miniseries based on Anuj Dhar's book India's Biggest Cover-up Hugh Purcell. "Subhas Chandra Bose: The Afterlife of India's
10 KB (848 words) - 07:44, 15 July 2020
Biggest ball of twine
souvenirs. It was the long-standing holder of the "biggest ball of twine" title in the Guinness Book of World Records, holding the title from its completion
8 KB (912 words) - 07:40, 29 June 2020
Sapna Book House
Sapna Book House is an Indian book store chain and a publisher of books. It is one of the biggest book shops in India. The Limca Book of Records recognised
13 KB (700 words) - 12:02, 18 February 2020
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever is a non-fiction book by Marc Aronson and HP Newquist. The book has 100 short articles on subjects that appeal
2 KB (238 words) - 20:29, 8 October 2019
The Biggest Loser
The Biggest Loser is a reality television format which started with the American TV show The Biggest Loser in 2004. The show centers on overweight and
33 KB (771 words) - 02:41, 5 July 2020
The Biggest Bear
The Biggest Bear is a children's picture book by Lynd Ward, first published in 1952. It was illustrated using casein paint, and won the Caldecott Medal
4 KB (409 words) - 03:26, 23 May 2020
The Jungle Book (2016 film)
The Jungle Book is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed and produced by Jon Favreau, written by Justin Marks and produced by Walt Disney Pictures
127 KB (11,360 words) - 15:45, 14 July 2020
Americanah
Yorkers just selected a book for the entire city to read in America's biggest book club", Business Insider, 16 March 2017. "One Book, One New York | And the
17 KB (1,877 words) - 00:04, 17 June 2020
Grey: Fifty Shades of Grey as Told by Christian (redirect from Grey book)
quantities of the book in order to meet release day demand. An editor for The Bookseller also commented that Grey could become the "biggest book of the year"
11 KB (1,045 words) - 21:36, 8 May 2020
Words of Radiance (redirect from The Stormlight Archive Book 2)
book The Book of Endless Pages?” The book, at 1088 pages, is the maximum printable size of a book for its publisher, Tor Books, making it the biggest
22 KB (2,659 words) - 04:07, 19 June 2020
The Biggest Game in Town
1983, Al Alvarez published, The Biggest Game in Town, a book detailing the 1981 World Series of Poker event. The first book of its kind, it described the
2 KB (96 words) - 21:54, 17 December 2019
Largest organisms (redirect from Biggest animal)
Christopher (2009-04-27). "The World's BIGGEST Brittle Stars!". The Echinoblog. Carwardine, M. 1995. The Guinness Book of Animal Records. Guinness Publishing
145 KB (14,990 words) - 22:09, 8 July 2020
Tablespoon
Retrieved 2016-05-29. Chuck Smothermon (2002). Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Meredith Books. p. 416. Retrieved 9 January 2015
8 KB (981 words) - 13:43, 4 July 2020
Kyobo Book Centre
May 2003, Kyobo Book Centre opened its eighth location (and third in Seoul) in Gangnam. It holds the record of being the biggest book store of the nation
7 KB (785 words) - 18:59, 29 December 2019
Cabbage stew
ISBN 978-1-55832-747-4. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Better Homes & Gardens Cooking. Wiley. 2002.
5 KB (442 words) - 07:07, 11 July 2020
Guinness World Records (redirect from Guinness Book of World Records)
2000 as The Guinness Book of Records and in previous United States editions as The Guinness Book of World Records, is a reference book published annually
41 KB (3,490 words) - 06:04, 16 July 2020
List of biggest box-office bombs
Harlin's pirate pic Cutthroat Island -- listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the biggest bomb of all time -- Sahara, The Adventures of Pluto Nash and
115 KB (6,104 words) - 13:47, 2 July 2020
Sandie (cookie)
Holiday Cookies". Vogue. Retrieved June 20, 2017. McConnell, S. (2003). Biggest Book of Cookies. Better Homes & Gardens. Better Homes and Gardens Books. p
4 KB (381 words) - 18:05, 5 June 2020
Results from sister projects

Chinese Merry Tales (1909)/4
the Biggest Volumes May Be 1955200Chinese Merry Tales — IV. How Useful the Biggest Volumes May BeY. T. Woo1909 ​ Chapter IV.—How Useful the Biggest Volumes
 Texts from Wikisource
Travels (book)
to sit back comfortably and complain about how they are doing it. The biggest problem between the sexes was the tendency to objectify the opposite sex
 Quotes from Wikiquote
Using Wikibooks/Donating a Book to Wikibooks
news reports, blogs, or other types of media. The book should be released under the GFDL. The biggest hurdle to most donations is copyright issues. Wikibooks
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)

Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Special pageSearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
Special pages
Printable version

Languages
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Help
Search results
Jump to navigationJump to search
biggest book
Results 1 – 20 of 27,584
The page "Biggest book" does not exist. You can ask for it to be created, but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered.
Jyoti Amge
Economic Times. 15 April 2020. Jyoti Amge on IMDb World's Smallest Woman, Jyoti Amge, releases the World's Biggest Book in Jaipur City Rediff Slide Show
8 KB (477 words) - 23:41, 9 July 2020
The Biggest Little Farm
11, 2018. "'Green Book' boosts awards season prospects with TIFF audience award win". Screen Daily, September 16, 2018. "The Biggest Little Farm announced
11 KB (979 words) - 22:17, 2 June 2020
Anuj Dhar (redirect from India's Biggest Cover-up)
purposes. Bose: Dead/Alive, 2017 miniseries based on Anuj Dhar's book India's Biggest Cover-up Hugh Purcell. "Subhas Chandra Bose: The Afterlife of India's
10 KB (848 words) - 07:44, 15 July 2020
Biggest ball of twine
souvenirs. It was the long-standing holder of the "biggest ball of twine" title in the Guinness Book of World Records, holding the title from its completion
8 KB (912 words) - 07:40, 29 June 2020
Sapna Book House
Sapna Book House is an Indian book store chain and a publisher of books. It is one of the biggest book shops in India. The Limca Book of Records recognised
13 KB (700 words) - 12:02, 18 February 2020
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever is a non-fiction book by Marc Aronson and HP Newquist. The book has 100 short articles on subjects that appeal
2 KB (238 words) - 20:29, 8 October 2019
The Biggest Loser
The Biggest Loser is a reality television format which started with the American TV show The Biggest Loser in 2004. The show centers on overweight and
33 KB (771 words) - 02:41, 5 July 2020
The Biggest Bear
The Biggest Bear is a children's picture book by Lynd Ward, first published in 1952. It was illustrated using casein paint, and won the Caldecott Medal
4 KB (409 words) - 03:26, 23 May 2020
The Jungle Book (2016 film)
The Jungle Book is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed and produced by Jon Favreau, written by Justin Marks and produced by Walt Disney Pictures
127 KB (11,360 words) - 15:45, 14 July 2020
Americanah
Yorkers just selected a book for the entire city to read in America's biggest book club", Business Insider, 16 March 2017. "One Book, One New York | And the
17 KB (1,877 words) - 00:04, 17 June 2020
Grey: Fifty Shades of Grey as Told by Christian (redirect from Grey book)
quantities of the book in order to meet release day demand. An editor for The Bookseller also commented that Grey could become the "biggest book of the year"
11 KB (1,045 words) - 21:36, 8 May 2020
Words of Radiance (redirect from The Stormlight Archive Book 2)
book The Book of Endless Pages?” The book, at 1088 pages, is the maximum printable size of a book for its publisher, Tor Books, making it the biggest
22 KB (2,659 words) - 04:07, 19 June 2020
The Biggest Game in Town
1983, Al Alvarez published, The Biggest Game in Town, a book detailing the 1981 World Series of Poker event. The first book of its kind, it described the
2 KB (96 words) - 21:54, 17 December 2019
Largest organisms (redirect from Biggest animal)
Christopher (2009-04-27). "The World's BIGGEST Brittle Stars!". The Echinoblog. Carwardine, M. 1995. The Guinness Book of Animal Records. Guinness Publishing
145 KB (14,990 words) - 22:09, 8 July 2020
Tablespoon
Retrieved 2016-05-29. Chuck Smothermon (2002). Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Meredith Books. p. 416. Retrieved 9 January 2015
8 KB (981 words) - 13:43, 4 July 2020
Kyobo Book Centre
May 2003, Kyobo Book Centre opened its eighth location (and third in Seoul) in Gangnam. It holds the record of being the biggest book store of the nation
7 KB (785 words) - 18:59, 29 December 2019
Cabbage stew
ISBN 978-1-55832-747-4. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Better Homes & Gardens Cooking. Wiley. 2002.
5 KB (442 words) - 07:07, 11 July 2020
Guinness World Records (redirect from Guinness Book of World Records)
2000 as The Guinness Book of Records and in previous United States editions as The Guinness Book of World Records, is a reference book published annually
41 KB (3,490 words) - 06:04, 16 July 2020
List of biggest box-office bombs
Harlin's pirate pic Cutthroat Island -- listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the biggest bomb of all time -- Sahara, The Adventures of Pluto Nash and
115 KB (6,104 words) - 13:47, 2 July 2020
Sandie (cookie)
Holiday Cookies". Vogue. Retrieved June 20, 2017. McConnell, S. (2003). Biggest Book of Cookies. Better Homes & Gardens. Better Homes and Gardens Books. p
4 KB (381 words) - 18:05, 5 June 2020
Results from sister projects

Chinese Merry Tales (1909)/4
the Biggest Volumes May Be 1955200Chinese Merry Tales — IV. How Useful the Biggest Volumes May BeY. T. Woo1909 ​ Chapter IV.—How Useful the Biggest Volumes
 Texts from Wikisource
Travels (book)
to sit back comfortably and complain about how they are doing it. The biggest problem between the sexes was the tendency to objectify the opposite sex
 Quotes from Wikiquote
Using Wikibooks/Donating a Book to Wikibooks
news reports, blogs, or other types of media. The book should be released under the GFDL. The biggest hurdle to most donations is copyright issues. Wikibooks
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)

Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Special pageSearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
Special pages
Printable version

Languages
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Help
Search results
Jump to navigationJump to search
biggest book
Results 1 – 20 of 27,584
The page "Biggest book" does not exist. You can ask for it to be created, but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered.
Jyoti Amge
Economic Times. 15 April 2020. Jyoti Amge on IMDb World's Smallest Woman, Jyoti Amge, releases the World's Biggest Book in Jaipur City Rediff Slide Show
8 KB (477 words) - 23:41, 9 July 2020
The Biggest Little Farm
11, 2018. "'Green Book' boosts awards season prospects with TIFF audience award win". Screen Daily, September 16, 2018. "The Biggest Little Farm announced
11 KB (979 words) - 22:17, 2 June 2020
Anuj Dhar (redirect from India's Biggest Cover-up)
purposes. Bose: Dead/Alive, 2017 miniseries based on Anuj Dhar's book India's Biggest Cover-up Hugh Purcell. "Subhas Chandra Bose: The Afterlife of India's
10 KB (848 words) - 07:44, 15 July 2020
Biggest ball of twine
souvenirs. It was the long-standing holder of the "biggest ball of twine" title in the Guinness Book of World Records, holding the title from its completion
8 KB (912 words) - 07:40, 29 June 2020
Sapna Book House
Sapna Book House is an Indian book store chain and a publisher of books. It is one of the biggest book shops in India. The Limca Book of Records recognised
13 KB (700 words) - 12:02, 18 February 2020
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever is a non-fiction book by Marc Aronson and HP Newquist. The book has 100 short articles on subjects that appeal
2 KB (238 words) - 20:29, 8 October 2019
The Biggest Loser
The Biggest Loser is a reality television format which started with the American TV show The Biggest Loser in 2004. The show centers on overweight and
33 KB (771 words) - 02:41, 5 July 2020
The Biggest Bear
The Biggest Bear is a children's picture book by Lynd Ward, first published in 1952. It was illustrated using casein paint, and won the Caldecott Medal
4 KB (409 words) - 03:26, 23 May 2020
The Jungle Book (2016 film)
The Jungle Book is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed and produced by Jon Favreau, written by Justin Marks and produced by Walt Disney Pictures
127 KB (11,360 words) - 15:45, 14 July 2020
Americanah
Yorkers just selected a book for the entire city to read in America's biggest book club", Business Insider, 16 March 2017. "One Book, One New York | And the
17 KB (1,877 words) - 00:04, 17 June 2020
Grey: Fifty Shades of Grey as Told by Christian (redirect from Grey book)
quantities of the book in order to meet release day demand. An editor for The Bookseller also commented that Grey could become the "biggest book of the year"
11 KB (1,045 words) - 21:36, 8 May 2020
Words of Radiance (redirect from The Stormlight Archive Book 2)
book The Book of Endless Pages?” The book, at 1088 pages, is the maximum printable size of a book for its publisher, Tor Books, making it the biggest
22 KB (2,659 words) - 04:07, 19 June 2020
The Biggest Game in Town
1983, Al Alvarez published, The Biggest Game in Town, a book detailing the 1981 World Series of Poker event. The first book of its kind, it described the
2 KB (96 words) - 21:54, 17 December 2019
Largest organisms (redirect from Biggest animal)
Christopher (2009-04-27). "The World's BIGGEST Brittle Stars!". The Echinoblog. Carwardine, M. 1995. The Guinness Book of Animal Records. Guinness Publishing
145 KB (14,990 words) - 22:09, 8 July 2020
Tablespoon
Retrieved 2016-05-29. Chuck Smothermon (2002). Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Meredith Books. p. 416. Retrieved 9 January 2015
8 KB (981 words) - 13:43, 4 July 2020
Kyobo Book Centre
May 2003, Kyobo Book Centre opened its eighth location (and third in Seoul) in Gangnam. It holds the record of being the biggest book store of the nation
7 KB (785 words) - 18:59, 29 December 2019
Cabbage stew
ISBN 978-1-55832-747-4. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Better Homes & Gardens Cooking. Wiley. 2002.
5 KB (442 words) - 07:07, 11 July 2020
Guinness World Records (redirect from Guinness Book of World Records)
2000 as The Guinness Book of Records and in previous United States editions as The Guinness Book of World Records, is a reference book published annually
41 KB (3,490 words) - 06:04, 16 July 2020
List of biggest box-office bombs
Harlin's pirate pic Cutthroat Island -- listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the biggest bomb of all time -- Sahara, The Adventures of Pluto Nash and
115 KB (6,104 words) - 13:47, 2 July 2020
Sandie (cookie)
Holiday Cookies". Vogue. Retrieved June 20, 2017. McConnell, S. (2003). Biggest Book of Cookies. Better Homes & Gardens. Better Homes and Gardens Books. p
4 KB (381 words) - 18:05, 5 June 2020
Results from sister projects

Chinese Merry Tales (1909)/4
the Biggest Volumes May Be 1955200Chinese Merry Tales — IV. How Useful the Biggest Volumes May BeY. T. Woo1909 ​ Chapter IV.—How Useful the Biggest Volumes
 Texts from Wikisource
Travels (book)
to sit back comfortably and complain about how they are doing it. The biggest problem between the sexes was the tendency to objectify the opposite sex
 Quotes from Wikiquote
Using Wikibooks/Donating a Book to Wikibooks
news reports, blogs, or other types of media. The book should be released under the GFDL. The biggest hurdle to most donations is copyright issues. Wikibooks
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)

Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Special pageSearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
Special pages
Printable version

Languages
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Help
Search results
Jump to navigationJump to search
biggest book
Results 1 – 20 of 27,584
The page "Biggest book" does not exist. You can ask for it to be created, but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered.
Jyoti Amge
Economic Times. 15 April 2020. Jyoti Amge on IMDb World's Smallest Woman, Jyoti Amge, releases the World's Biggest Book in Jaipur City Rediff Slide Show
8 KB (477 words) - 23:41, 9 July 2020
The Biggest Little Farm
11, 2018. "'Green Book' boosts awards season prospects with TIFF audience award win". Screen Daily, September 16, 2018. "The Biggest Little Farm announced
11 KB (979 words) - 22:17, 2 June 2020
Anuj Dhar (redirect from India's Biggest Cover-up)
purposes. Bose: Dead/Alive, 2017 miniseries based on Anuj Dhar's book India's Biggest Cover-up Hugh Purcell. "Subhas Chandra Bose: The Afterlife of India's
10 KB (848 words) - 07:44, 15 July 2020
Biggest ball of twine
souvenirs. It was the long-standing holder of the "biggest ball of twine" title in the Guinness Book of World Records, holding the title from its completion
8 KB (912 words) - 07:40, 29 June 2020
Sapna Book House
Sapna Book House is an Indian book store chain and a publisher of books. It is one of the biggest book shops in India. The Limca Book of Records recognised
13 KB (700 words) - 12:02, 18 February 2020
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever
For Boys Only: The Biggest, Baddest Book Ever is a non-fiction book by Marc Aronson and HP Newquist. The book has 100 short articles on subjects that appeal
2 KB (238 words) - 20:29, 8 October 2019
The Biggest Loser
The Biggest Loser is a reality television format which started with the American TV show The Biggest Loser in 2004. The show centers on overweight and
33 KB (771 words) - 02:41, 5 July 2020
The Biggest Bear
The Biggest Bear is a children's picture book by Lynd Ward, first published in 1952. It was illustrated using casein paint, and won the Caldecott Medal
4 KB (409 words) - 03:26, 23 May 2020
The Jungle Book (2016 film)
The Jungle Book is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed and produced by Jon Favreau, written by Justin Marks and produced by Walt Disney Pictures
127 KB (11,360 words) - 15:45, 14 July 2020
Americanah
Yorkers just selected a book for the entire city to read in America's biggest book club", Business Insider, 16 March 2017. "One Book, One New York | And the
17 KB (1,877 words) - 00:04, 17 June 2020
Grey: Fifty Shades of Grey as Told by Christian (redirect from Grey book)
quantities of the book in order to meet release day demand. An editor for The Bookseller also commented that Grey could become the "biggest book of the year"
11 KB (1,045 words) - 21:36, 8 May 2020
Words of Radiance (redirect from The Stormlight Archive Book 2)
book The Book of Endless Pages?” The book, at 1088 pages, is the maximum printable size of a book for its publisher, Tor Books, making it the biggest
22 KB (2,659 words) - 04:07, 19 June 2020
The Biggest Game in Town
1983, Al Alvarez published, The Biggest Game in Town, a book detailing the 1981 World Series of Poker event. The first book of its kind, it described the
2 KB (96 words) - 21:54, 17 December 2019
Largest organisms (redirect from Biggest animal)
Christopher (2009-04-27). "The World's BIGGEST Brittle Stars!". The Echinoblog. Carwardine, M. 1995. The Guinness Book of Animal Records. Guinness Publishing
145 KB (14,990 words) - 22:09, 8 July 2020
Tablespoon
Retrieved 2016-05-29. Chuck Smothermon (2002). Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Meredith Books. p. 416. Retrieved 9 January 2015
8 KB (981 words) - 13:43, 4 July 2020
Kyobo Book Centre
May 2003, Kyobo Book Centre opened its eighth location (and third in Seoul) in Gangnam. It holds the record of being the biggest book store of the nation
7 KB (785 words) - 18:59, 29 December 2019
Cabbage stew
ISBN 978-1-55832-747-4. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Better Homes and Gardens Biggest Book of Slow Cooker Recipes. Better Homes & Gardens Cooking. Wiley. 2002.
5 KB (442 words) - 07:07, 11 July 2020
Guinness World Records (redirect from Guinness Book of World Records)
2000 as The Guinness Book of Records and in previous United States editions as The Guinness Book of World Records, is a reference book published annually
41 KB (3,490 words) - 06:04, 16 July 2020
List of biggest box-office bombs
Harlin's pirate pic Cutthroat Island -- listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the biggest bomb of all time -- Sahara, The Adventures of Pluto Nash and
115 KB (6,104 words) - 13:47, 2 July 2020
Sandie (cookie)
Holiday Cookies". Vogue. Retrieved June 20, 2017. McConnell, S. (2003). Biggest Book of Cookies. Better Homes & Gardens. Better Homes and Gardens Books. p
4 KB (381 words) - 18:05, 5 June 2020
Results from sister projects

Chinese Merry Tales (1909)/4
the Biggest Volumes May Be 1955200Chinese Merry Tales — IV. How Useful the Biggest Volumes May BeY. T. Woo1909 ​ Chapter IV.—How Useful the Biggest Volumes
 Texts from Wikisource
Travels (book)
to sit back comfortably and complain about how they are doing it. The biggest problem between the sexes was the tendency to objectify the opposite sex
 Quotes from Wikiquote
Using Wikibooks/Donating a Book to Wikibooks
news reports, blogs, or other types of media. The book should be released under the GFDL. The biggest hurdle to most donations is copyright issues. Wikibooks
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)

Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Special pageSearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
Special pages
Printable version

Languages
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

The Biggest Little Farm
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Biggest little Farm
The biggest little farm poster.png
One of US theatrical release posters
Directed by	John Chester
Produced by	Sandra Keats
John Chester
Written by	John Chester
Mark Monroe
Starring	John Chester
Molly Chester
Music by	Jeff Beal
Cinematography	John Chester
Benji Lanpher
Mallory Cunningham
Chris Martin
Kyle Romanek
Edited by	Amy Overbeck
Production
company
FarmLore Films
Distributed by	
Neon
(USA)
Le Pacte
(France)
Prokino
(Germany, Switzerland)
Madman Entertainment
(Australia, New Zealand)
Cinemien 
(Benelux)
Release date
August 28, 2018 (Telluride)[1]
May 10, 2019 (United States)
Running time
92 minutes
Country	United States
Language	English
Box office	$5 million[2][3]
The Biggest Little Farm is a 2018 American documentary film, directed by Emmy Award Winning director John Chester.[4][5] The film profiles the life of Chester and his wife Molly as they acquire and establish themselves on Apricot Lane Farms in Moorpark, California.[6]

The film premiered on September 1, 2018 at the Telluride Film Festival.[7] It had its second screening at the 2018 Toronto International Film Festival, where it was named second runner-up for the People's Choice Award: Documentaries.[8] It was selected as the Opening Night film at Doc NYC in November 2018.[9] The film was screened as part of the Spotlight Section at the 2019 Sundance Film Festival. It also screened at the 29th New Orleans Film Festival on October 24, 2018.[10]

The film was acquired for theatrical distribution by the independent film company Neon,[6] and was released on May 10, 2019 in Los Angeles and New York. The film expanded into Austin, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Houston, Minneapolis, Nashville, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Portland, San Diego, San Francisco and Washington D.C on May 17 and additional markets throughout May and June. The film has been acquired by The Exchange for international distribution.[11]


Contents
1	Plot
2	Reception
3	Awards and nominations
4	References
5	External links
Plot
The Biggest Little Farm is about a young couple who decide to leave their old lives behind and buy a farm. The movie especially points out how hard it is to keep a farm running and all of the hardships, sadness and anger they face, but also the happy, beautiful moments and the relationships they build.

Reception
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 91% based on 75 reviews with an average rating of 7.34/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Uplifting, educational, and entertaining, The Biggest Little Farm is an environmental advocacy documentary with a satisfying side dish of hope for the future."[12] On Metacritic, it holds a 74/100 score (indicating "generally favorable reviews") based on 25 critics.[13]

In his Variety review of the film, Peter DeBruge noted that it "feel[s] like fresh air for the soul.",[14] and New York Times critic Glenn Kenny wrote "it may also revive your wonder at the weird but ultimately awe-inspiring ways in which humans can help nature do its work".[15] Additionally, The Los Angeles Times's Robert Abele wrote that the film is a "lush tour of transformed land and photogenic fauna, is so appealing as a chronicle of dedicated do-gooders who actually did good (and shot every frame of it). [...] Watching the Chesters fight past disillusionment to learn the real lessons of harvesting in communion with nature is what gives the movie its rousing, illuminating power."[16]

On December 4, 2019, the film's composer, Jeff Beal, conducted the Hollywood Chamber Orchestra, performing his score live to picture at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles.

Awards and nominations
A list of nominations and awards the film has received is as follows:

Palm Springs International Film Festival - Audience Award for Best Documentary [17]
Toronto International Film Festival - Second runner-up for The Grolsch People's Choice Documentary Award [18]
Sundance Film Festival - Runner-up for the Festival Favorite Award [19]
American Film Institute Fest - Audience Award for Best Feature [20]
Boulder Film Festival - Grand Jury Prize for Feature Length Film [21]
Boulder Film Festival - Best Documentary [21]
Mill Valley Film Festival - Silver Audience Award for Valley of the Docs Presentation [22]
Hamptons International Film Festival - Audience Award for Best Documentary Feature [23]
Middleburg Film Festival - Audience Award for Best Documentary [24]
Annapolis Film Festival - Audience Award for Best Feature Documentary [25]
Gasparilla Film Festival - Grand Jury Prize for Best Feature Documentary
Sedona Film Festival - Best of the Fest [26]
Sedona Film Festival - Director's Choice Award for Best Documentary [26]
92nd Oscars Shortlist - Documentary Feature
References
 "Telluride Film Review: ‘The Biggest Little Farm’". Variety, September 1, 2018.
 "The Biggest Little Farm (2019)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 23, 2019.
 "The Biggest Little Farm (2019)". The Numbers. Retrieved October 11, 2019.
 "'The Biggest Little Farm': Film Review | Telluride 2018". The Hollywood Reporter, September 9, 2018.
 Hipes, Patrick; Hipes, Patrick (28 April 2018). "Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards: 'Bold And The Beautiful', 'Sesame Street' Top Winners".
 "Toronto: Neon Lands Documentary ‘The Biggest Little Farm’". Variety, September 11, 2018.
 "Toronto: Neon Takes 'The Biggest Little Farm' Doc for North America". The Hollywood Reporter, September 11, 2018.
 "'Green Book' boosts awards season prospects with TIFF audience award win". Screen Daily, September 16, 2018.
 "The Biggest Little Farm announced as the 2018 Opening Night Film!".
 "The Biggest Little Farm | New Orleans Film Society". neworleansfilmsociety.org. Retrieved 2018-09-30.
 Kay, Jeremy (2019-01-17). "'The Biggest Little Farm' lands at The Exchange for international, separately scores key deals (exclusive)". Screen.
 "The Biggest Little Farm (2019)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 23, 2019.
 "Digest of Rules". NFL.com. Retrieved August 24, 2019.
 Debruge, Peter. "Telluride Film Review: 'The Biggest Little Farm'". Variety.
 Kenny, Glenn. "'The Biggest Little Farm' Review: The Pleasures of D.I.Y. Agriculture".
 (subscription required)Abele, Robert. "Review: 'The Biggest Little Farm' is a winning doc about a couple's agricultural dream".
 "30th Annual Palm Springs International Film Festival Announces Award Winners - Palm Springs International Film Festival". www.psfilmfest.org.
 "Announcing the TIFF '18 Award Winners". TIFF.
 Tuesday; February 5th; 2019. "2019 SUNDANCE FILM FESTIVAL: KNOCK DOWN THE HOUSE WINS FESTIVAL FAVORITE AWARD". www.sundance.org.
 "Announcing AFI FEST 2018 Audience and Jury Award Winners".
 "2019 Awards – BIFF – Boulder International Film Festival".
 "MVFF41 AUDIENCE FAVOURITES – Mill Valley Film Festival". www.mvff.com.
 "HIFF 2018 Awards Announced". hamptonsfilmfest.org.
 "GREEN BOOK and BIGGEST LITTLE FARM Win Audience Awards at Middleburg Film Festival". VIMOOZ. 22 October 2018.
 "Annapolis Film Festival - Home". Annapolis Film Festival.
 "2019 Festival Award Winners". Sedona International Film Festival.
External links
Official US website
Official Trailer
Official Farm info
The Biggest Little Farm on IMDb
The Biggest Little Farm at Box Office Mojo
The Biggest Little Farm at Rotten Tomatoes Edit this at Wikidata
The Biggest Little Farm at Metacritic
Categories: 2018 filmsEnglish-language filmsAmerican filmsAmerican documentary filmsDocumentary films about agriculture in the United StatesNeon (distributor) films
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Italiano
Français
Edit links
This page was last edited on 2 June 2020, at 22:17 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

The Jungle Book (2016 film)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Jungle Book
Official artwork poster of the film
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Jon Favreau
Produced by	
Jon Favreau
Brigham Taylor
Written by	Justin Marks
Based on	The Jungle Book
by Rudyard Kipling
Starring	
Bill Murray
Ben Kingsley
Idris Elba
Lupita Nyong'o
Scarlett Johansson
Giancarlo Esposito
Christopher Walken
Neel Sethi
Music by	John Debney
Cinematography	Bill Pope
Edited by	Mark Livolsi
Production
company
Walt Disney Pictures
Fairview Entertainment
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release date
April 4, 2016 (El Capitan Theatre)
April 15, 2016 (United States)
Running time
106 minutes
Country	United States[1]
Language	English
Budget	$175–177 million[2][3]
Box office	$966.6 million[4]
The Jungle Book is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed and prod
2454- ced by Jon Favreau, written by Justin Marks and produced by Walt Disney Pictures. Based on Rudyard Kipling's eponymous collective works and inspired by Walt Disney's 1967 animated film of the same name,[5][6] The Jungle Book is a live-action/CGI film that tells the story of Mowgli, an orphaned human boy who, guided by his animal guardians, sets out on a journey of self-discovery while evading the threatening Shere Khan. The film introduces Neel Sethi as Mowgli, along with voice and motion capture performances from Ben Kingsley, Bill Murray, Idris Elba, Lupita Nyong'o, Scarlett Johansson, Giancarlo Esposito, and Christopher Walken.

Favreau, Marks, and producer Brigham Taylor developed the film's story as a balance between Disney's animated adaptation and Kipling's original works, borrowing elements from both into the film. Principal photography commenced in 2014, with filming taking place entirely in Los Angeles. The film required extensive use of computer-generated imagery to portray the animals and settings.[7]

The Jungle Book was released in the United States in Disney Digital 3D, RealD 3D, IMAX 3D, D-Box, and premium large formats, on April 15, 2016. It became a critical and commercial success, grossing over $966 million worldwide, making it the fifth-highest-grossing film of 2016 and the 30th-highest-grossing film of all time. The film received praise for its visual effects, vocal performan
2458- es, direction, musical score, and its faithfulness to the spirit of the original animated film and the Kipling novel. It won accolades for achievements in visual effects at the 89th Academy Awards, 22nd Critics' Choice Awards and 70th British Academy Film Awards. A sequel is in development, with Favreau and Marks set to return as director/producer and writer, respectively.


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
2.1	Voice cast
3	Production
3.1	Development
3.2	Filming and visual effects
3.3	Sound
4	Music
4.1	Track listing
5	Release
5.1	Home media
6	Reception
6.1	Box office
6.1.1	United States and Canada
6.1.2	Other countries
6.2	Critical response
6.3	Accolades
7	Sequel
8	References
9	External links
Plot
Mowgli is a "man-cub" raised by the Indian wolf Raksha and her pack, led by Akela, in an Indian jungle ever since he was brought to them as an infant by the black panther Bagheera. Bagheera trains Mowgli to learn the ways of the wolves, but the boy faces certain challenges and falls behind his wolf siblings, while Akela objects to him using human "tricks", like building tools, instead of learning the ways of the pack.

One day, during the dry season, the jungle animals gather to drink the water that remains as part of a truce during a drought that enables the jungle's wildlife to drink without fear of their predators. The truce is disrupted when a fire-scarred bengal tiger named Shere Khan arrives, detecting Mowgli's scent in the crowd. Consumed by a vendetta against humans for scarring him with fire, he threatens to kill Mowgli at the end of the drought. After the drought ends, the wolves debate whether or not they should keep Mowgli. Mowgli decides to leave the jungle for the safety of his pack. Bagheera volunteers to guide him to the nearby "man-village".

En route, Shere Khan ambushes them, but Mowgli manages to escape amidst a water buffalo stampede. Later, Mowgli meets an enormous reticulated python named Kaa, who hypnotizes him. While under her influence, Mowgli sees a vision of his father being killed by Shere Khan while protecting him. Kaa attempts to devour Mowgli, but she is attacked by a himalayan brown bear named Baloo who rescues the unconscious Mowgli. Mowgli later awakens and retrieves some difficult-to-access honey for Baloo as repayment, with the two bonding in the process. Mowgli agrees to stay with Baloo until the winter season arrives. Meanwhile, upon learning that Mowgli has left the jungle, Shere Khan kills Akela and threatens the pack to lure Mowgli out.

Bagheera eventually finds Mowgli and Baloo and is shocked that Mowgli has not joined the humans as he had agreed, but Baloo calms him down and persuades both of them to sleep on it. During the night, Mowgli finds a herd of Indian elephants gathered around a ditch and uses vines to save their baby. Although Baloo and Bagheera are impressed, Baloo realizes that he cannot guarantee Mowgli's safety after learning that he is being hunted by Shere Khan. Baloo agrees to push Mowgli away to get him to continue onward to the man village.

Mowgli is kidnapped by a gang of monkeys (namely lion-tailed macaques, northern pig-tailed macaques, langurs (Northern plains gray langurs, Gee's golden langurs, and Nilgiri langurs), and Hoolock gibbons that resemble northern white-cheeked gibbons) known as the "Bandar-log", who present him to their leader, a deranged giant ape named King Louie. Assuming that all humans can make "the red flower" (fire), King Louie offers Mowgli protection from Shere Khan in exchange for it. Baloo distracts King Louie while Bagheera tries to sneak Mowgli out, but their ruse is uncovered. As King Louie chases Mowgli through his temple, he informs Mowgli of Akela's death. King Louie's rampage eventually causes his temple to collapse on top of him.

Furious that Baloo and Bagheera neglected to tell him about Akela's death, Mowgli goes to confront Shere Khan. He steals a lit torch from the man village and heads back to the jungle, accidentally starting a wildfire in the process. He confronts Shere Khan, who claims that Mowgli has made himself the enemy of the jungle by causing the wildfire. Seeing the wolves' fear of him, Mowgli throws the torch into a river. Baloo, Bagheera, and the wolf pack hold off Shere Khan, giving Mowgli enough time to flee into the burning jungle. He lures Shere Khan up a dead tree and onto a branch, which breaks under the tiger's weight, and Shere Khan falls into the fire to his death. Mowgli the
2493-  directs the elephants to divert the river and put out the fire.

In the aftermath, Raksha becomes the new leader of the wolf pack. Mowgli decides to utilize his equipment and tricks for his own use, having found his true home and calling with his wolf family, Baloo, and Bagheera.

Cast
Main article: List of The Jungle Book characters

Neel Sethi, the actor who portrayed Mowgli
Neel Sethi as Mowgli: 
A young boy who was raised by wolves. The search for casting Mowgli was extensive, with thousands of children auditioning from the United States, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Canada. Eventually, newcomer Neel Sethi was confirmed for the role, with casting director Rebecca Williams describing him as embodying "the heart, humor, and daring of the character. He's warm and accessible, yet also has an intelligence well beyond his years and impressed us all with his ability to hold his own in any situation".[8] Sethi underwent parkour training in preparation for the role.[7]
Kendrick Reyes as toddler Mowgli.
Ritesh Rajan as Mowgli's father.
Voice cast
Ben Kingsley as Bagheera: 
A black panther who is Mowgli's mentor and protector. Favreau said that Kingsley "brought this elegance and refinement to the character, yet with great firmness. He's an interesting dude with crazy range".[5] Kingsley said that Bagheera's "role in Mowgli's life is to educate, to protect and to guide".[5] Kingsley said that "[Bagheera] is instantly recognizable by the way he talks, how he acts and what his ethical code is", and stated that "Rudyard Kipling’s stories of Mowgli’s adventures with these extraordinary, beautifully defined characters introduce many around the world to the Indian subcontinent and its culture" through he felt that both the film and the book's story was ultimately about Mowgli's search for a family. "There are many wonderful stories that are based on the struggle of an orphan to find a family — to create a family around him, which is a very poignant part of Jon Favreau’s version of the film. It will have its beautiful, thrilling, exciting, joyous moments of celebration. But must also quite rightly have its darker moments, because we’re dealing with a very isolated child who triumphs over enormous odds".[5]
Bill Murray as Baloo: 
A Himalayan brown bear who encounters and befriends Mowgli. Favreau had Murray in mind to voice Baloo since the beginning of the project. “He’s perfect", says the director. “Bill just exudes all the charm and humor that you need and expect from Baloo. He has a certain dryness and a rebellious quality”. He had also always wanted to work with Murray, having been a huge fan of his work, though he has been aware of how hard it is to contact him. Fortunately for Favreau, he was able to get a hold of Murray, and he agreed to come on board, with Favreau going on to comment that “Once he came aboard, he was incredibly passionate. He has a very high standard”. “I just couldn’t say no to playing Baloo", says Murray. “Jon [Favreau] is a terrific storyteller and I’m such a huge fan of the original stories. Kipling wrote a lot of amazing stuff. I read that book when I was about 22 and I’ve always thought that it was just extraordinary writing".[5]
Idris Elba as Shere Khan: 
A fearsome, scarred Bengal tiger with a blinded left eye who wishes to kill Mowgli. Favreau felt that Elba's voice "wields tremendous presence in a room",[9] and that "[Elba]'s got such gravity and brings his steely presence, a deep timbre that echoes in a larger-than-life way. He understands this scarred, imposing tiger in a way the character demands".[9] Elba said that "Shere Khan reigns with fear. He terrorizes everyone he encounters because he comes from a place of fear".[9] Elba was highly impressed with the film's effects, stating that "[w]hen Jon [Favreau] showed [Elba] Shere Khan's expressions and how he moves, [he] had to ask, ‘Is that a real tiger?’ The technology is incredible".[9]
Lupita Nyong'o as Raksha: 
A female Indian wolf who is Mowgli's adoptive mother. Favreau and Marks decided to give the character of Raksha a more predominant role in the film similar to Kipling's original tales.[10] Favreau chose Nyong’o because he believed her voice imbued the emotion required for the role, commenting "Lupita has tremendous depth of emotion in her performance. There's an emotional underpinning she brings, and a strength, and we wanted that for this surrogate mother. Much of that comes from her voice".[11] Along with saying that she was a fan of the original Disney animated film, Nyong’o also commented, “I really enjoyed preparing for this and learning about wolves and how social they are, how they stick together", continues Nyong’o. “There’s such an order - a hierarchy to a wolf pack. Mowgli tries to fit in with the other wolf pups. He has his challenges, but he is very much a part of the pack as far as Raksha is concerned".[5]
Scarlett Johansson as Kaa: 
A gigantic reticulated python. Favreau decided to cast Johansson, a recurrent collaborator of Favreau's, to play Kaa, originally a male character, as he felt the original film was "a little too male-oriented".[12] On Kaa's role in the film, Favreau said that "Mowgli is exploring different regions of the jungle — mistier, darker, more mysterious parts of the jungle. That’s where Kaa lives. That’s where she gets ahold of him — till Baloo rescues him and brings him back to his cave".[9] Johansson said that "For [her], the opportunity to play Kaa as envisioned by Jon [Favreau] was so exciting",[9] and described Kaa as "the mirror into Mowgli’s past".[9]
Giancarlo Esposito as Akela: 
A male Indian wolf who leads the pack. Producer Brigham Taylor praised Esposito, claiming that "Giancarlo is an esteemed actor who absolutely embodies the nature of the character".[9] Along with commenting that he's a fan of both the animated film and Kipling's books, Giancarlo described his character as “...a fierce patriarch of the wolf pack. He believes that the strength of the pack lies in what each and every wolf offers. He knows if they stick together, they can survive. He’s a great leader, a wise teacher. I aspire to be like him”.[5]
Christopher Walken as King Louie: 
A giant ape who rules the Bandar-log. Favreau decided to change King Louie from an orangutan to a Gigantopithecus due to the fact that orangutans are not native to India, where the story takes place.[6] His character was given a slight alteration from the 1967 film and was partly inspired by Marlon Brando's character Colonel Kurtz in Apocalypse Now,[10] as well as incorporating Walken's own physical mannerisms.[13] In regards to Louie's changes, Favreau stated, "We created this looming figure that was trying to extract the secret of fire from Mowgli. And also this gave Mowgli the idea that if he had fire, he could have power over Shere Khan, whether it was good or bad. So there was Lord of the Rings aspect to that; the fire was almost like the ring in that was going to give someone ultimate power, but corrupt them as well as create destruction".[14]
Garry Shandling as Ikki, an Indian porcupine that observes the Water Truce, a character not featured in the original film.[9] The film would go on to be Shandling's final film, having died of pulmonary embolism before the film's release.
Brighton Rose as Grey Brother, an Indian wolf pup who is the youngest of Mowgli's adoptive siblings.[9]
Jon Favreau as Fred, a pygmy hog. A character not featured in the original film.[9]
Sam Raimi as an Indian giant squirrel.[9]
Russell Peters as Rocky, an Indian rhinoceros.[9] This character was originally meant to appear in the 1967 film, but Walt Disney scrapped the character.
Madeleine Favreau as Raquel, an Indian rhinoceros.[9]
Sara Arrington as a Nilgai.[9]
Emjay Anthony, Max Favreau, Chloe Hechter, Asher Blinkoff, Knox Gagnon, Sasha Schrieber, and Kai Schrieber voice the Young Wolves.[9]

Dee Bradley Baker, Artie Esposito, Sean Johnson, and Allan Trautman provide additional animal voices.[9]

Production
Development
"The idea of going out to the jungle and shooting this, it just felt like it wouldn't have the magic that the 1967 film had had. There was a dreamlike quality to it. There was a surreal quality to it. It was a high-water mark for character animation and to me, that's what I remember about it. And so I wanted to make sure we preserved that...But what [Alan] Horn said was: Look at the technology. Look at Life of Pi, Avatar. Why not use the technology to create a whole world that transports you? Let's really embrace this new technology and see what we can do if we push its limit".
— Jon Favreau on approaching the film's technical intent.[15]
On July 9, 2013, Walt Disney Pictures announced that a live-action adaptation of Rudyard Kipling's short story collection The Jungle Book was in development, with Justin Marks set to write it.[16] The film would be Disney's third live-action adaptation of Kipling's works, following the 1994 film and the 1998 direct-to-video film Mowgli's Story; and the studio's fourth overall after the 1967 animated film.[17] Jon Favreau was confirmed as director on November.[18] Favreau as a child used to watch Disney's 1967 animated film.[10] He felt the need to strike a balance between the two films by retaining the buoyant spirit of the 1967 film, including some of its memorable songs while crafting a film with more realism and peril. He also stressed the importance of nature and realized how things have shifted during Kipling's time and now, "In Kipling's time, nature was something to be overcome. Now nature is something to be protected".[10] He was encouraged by Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn to take advantage of the film's setting and story as an opportunity to use the latest advancements in photorealistic rendering, computer-generated imagery, and motion capture technologies.[19] The story of the film is not independently taken from Kipling's works, but also borrows cinematic inspirations from other films, including the child-mentor relationship in Shane (1953), the establishment of rules in a dangerous world from Goodfellas (1990) and the use of a shadowy jungle figure in Apocalypse Now (1979).[10]

Pixar Animation Studios assisted in the development of the story, as well as providing suggestions for the film's end credits sequence.[20] John Lasseter, Pixar and Walt Disney Animation Studios' then-chief creative officer, suggested to end the film with the original physical book featured in the 1967 film opening.[21]

Filming and visual effects
Principal photography took place entirely on sound stages at L.A. Center Studios[14] in downtown Los Angeles.[11][22] The animal characters were created entirely in computer animation, with the assistance of footage of real animal movement, the actors recording their lines, and performance capture for reference.[6] The production team underwent a thorough process to realistically convey the animals' speaking, while still making them perceptually believable to the audience. Favreau researched earlier films featuring anthropomorphic animals, including Walt Disney's animated features, such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and Bambi, as well as modern films such as Babe and adopted certain techniques from those films into The Jungle Book.[14] Nearly 70 separate species of animals native to India are featured in the film, with several species being portrayed as "150% larger" than their actual counterparts.[14]

Jim Henson's Creature Shop was brought in to provide animal puppet figures for Sethi to act against, although none appear in the finished film.[23] The animal puppets were performed by Artie Esposito, Sean Johnson, Allan Trautman, and April Warren.[9] Favreau utilized motion capture with certain actors, expressing a desire to avoid overusing the technology in order to prevent evoking an uncanny valley effect.[6][12] For instance, Bill Murray's lifted eyebrow was incorporated into Baloo's facial gestures.[19]

The Moving Picture Company (MPC) and Weta Digital created the film's visual effects.[19] MPC developed new software for animating muscular structure in the animals.[14] Around 1,000 remote jungle locations in India were photographed and used as a reference in post-production.[24] Weta was responsible for animating the King Louie sequence, with visual effects supervisor Keith Miller adding that, "It was important for Jon to see Christopher Walken in the creature. So we took some of the distinctive Walken facial features—iconic lines, wrinkles and folds—and integrated them into the animated character".[25] Favreau expressed desire in wanting the film's 3D shots to imbue the abilities of the multiplane camera system utilized in Disney's earlier animated films.[20] At Favreau's behest, the idea was extended into the film's version of the Walt Disney Pictures opening production logo, which was recreated as "a hand-painted, cel-animated multi-plane logo" in homage to the animated films of that era, also incorporating the word "Presents" in the same font as the 1967 film's opening credits.[20] The film's ending also features the original physical book that opened the 1967 film.[20]

Sound
Director Jon Favreau and composer John Debney sought to recreate the Fantasound experience Walt Disney, himself, had in mind. When mixing the soundtrack in Dolby Atmos, as Favreau said, "we isolated instruments when we could. And in the sound mix, we created a Fantasound mix. If you see the film in Atmos, you will feel that there are instruments that move around the theater".[26] A mention for Fantasound appears in the film's closing credits.

Music
The musical score for The Jungle Book was composed and conducted by frequent Favreau collaborator John Debney,[27] mostly drawing from George Bruns' original music. According to Debney, “Jon [Favreau] wanted a timeless sound to the score and I embraced that".[9] Debney created a theme for Mowgli that "[i]t's not overly emotional. It has an elegance and majesty to it. He’s becoming a man through this whole experience and that’s what [Debney and Favreau] wanted to say with his theme".[9] Shere Khan's theme was conformed of a three or four-note motif,[9] while Baloo's "called for quirky strings and bass" that is "frolicking and emotional".[9] While Bagheera doesn't have a theme of his own, he's represented by French horns and strings,[9] and Kaa's music features snake-like sounds,[9] while King Louie's features many instruments, like percussion instruments, bass marimbas, etc.[9]

While Richard M. Sherman, who originally co-wrote songs for the 1967 film with his brother Robert, was originally reported to be writing new songs for the remake,[28] Favreau decided not to make the film a musical. Still, he and Debney incorporated several songs from the 1967 animated film.[29] "The Bare Necessities", written by Terry Gilkyson, is performed by Murray and Sethi,[10] and a cover version by Dr. John is featured in the end credits. "I Wan'na Be Like You" and "Trust in Me" — written by the Sherman Brothers - are performed by Walken and Johansson, respectively; Richard M. Sherman wrote revised lyrics for Walken's version of "I Wan'na Be Like You".[10] Johansson's rendition of "Trust in Me" was produced by Mark Ronson and appears in the end credits only.[10]

The Jungle Book (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)
Film score by John Debney
Released	April 15, 2016
Recorded	2015–16
Studio	Sony Pictures Studios (score)
Esplanade Studios, New Orleans 
Chalice Recording Studios
Music Shed Studios, New Orleans
Genre	Orchestral, swing jazz
Length	74:17
Label	Walt Disney
Producer	John Debney
John Debney chronology
The Young Messiah
(2016)	The Jungle Book
(2016)	Mother's Day
(2016)
Walt Disney Records released the film's soundtrack on April 15, 2016.[30]

Track listing
All music is composed by John Debney except where noted.

No.	Title	Writer(s)	Performer(s)	Length
1.	"The Bare Necessities"	Terry Gilkyson	Dr. John and The Nite Trippers	3:36
2.	"Trust in Me"	Richard M. Sherman, Robert B. Sherman	Scarlett Johansson	2:55
3.	"Main Titles[Note 1] / Jungle Run"	 	 	2:27
4.	"Wolves / Law of the Jungle"	 	 	2:16
5.	"Water Truce"	 	 	3:40
6.	"Rains Return"	 	 	1:46
7.	"Mowgli's Leaving / Elephant Theme"	 	 	3:28
8.	"Shere Khan Attacks / Stampede"	 	 	2:06
9.	"Kaa / Baloo to the Rescue" (quotes "Trust in Me")	 	 	5:21
10.	"Honeycomb Climb"	 	 	3:31
11.	"Man Village"	 	 	2:59
12.	"Mowgli and the Pit" (quotes "The Bare Necessities")	 	 	3:26
13.	"Monkeys Kidnap Mowgli"	 	 	1:52
14.	"Arriving at King Louie's Temple"	 	 	4:35
15.	"Cold Lair Chase"	 	 	4:03
16.	"Red Flower" (quotes "Trust in Me")	 	 	3:15
17.	"To the River"	 	 	3:05
18.	"Shere Khan's War Theme"	 	 	2:37
19.	"Shere Khan and the Fire"	 	 	4:52
20.	"Elephant Waterfall"	 	 	3:27
21.	"Mowgli Wins the Race" (quotes "The Bare Necessities")	 	 	0:41
22.	"Jungle Book Closes"	 	 	2:16
23.	"I Wan'na Be Like You"	Richard M. Sherman, Robert B. Sherman	Christopher Walken	3:02
24.	"The Bare Necessities"	Terry Gilkyson	Bill Murray, Kermit Ruffins	3:01
Total length:	74:17
Note 1. ^ Original "When You Wish Upon a Star" melody composed by Leigh Harline; Walt Disney Pictures logo melody composed by Mark Mancina; "The Jungle Book Overture" written by George Bruns.
Release

Jon Favreau at the premiere of The Jungle Book in Sydney, Australia
The film was originally scheduled for October 9, 2015, but the film's release date was later postponed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures to April 15, 2016.[31][32] The film was released in the Dolby Vision format in Dolby Cinema in the United States,[33] and is the first film to be released in Dolby Visio
2606-  3D (in a few select theaters in New York City and Chicago).[34] The Jungle Book held its world premiere at the El Capitan Theatre on April 4, 2016.[35]

It was released on April 8 in 15 countries, including Argentina, Australia, Russia, Malaysia, and most notably in India a week ahead of its U.S. debut on April 15.[36] The release date in India was strategic for the film as it coincided with the Indian New Year and was a holiday in most parts of the country.[37] The film had a special Hindi version with famous actors giving their voices to the main characters, including Irrfan Khan as Baloo, Om Puri as Bagheera, Priyanka Chopra as Ka, Nana Patekar as Sher Khan and Shefali Shah as Raksha. As the Japanese anime series Jungle Book Shōnen Mowgli had been immensely popular in India in the 1990s, Disney India also commissioned a contemporary recording of "Jungle Jungle Baat Chali Hai" (originally used for the popular Indian version of Jungle Book Shōnen Mowgli), overseen by the original Hindi song's composers Vishal Bhardwaj and Gulzar, and released it as part of the film's promotional campaign in India.[38][39]

Home media
The film was released digitally on August 23, 2016, and on DVD and Blu-ray on August 30 (August 22 in the UK[40]). A 3D Blu-ray was said to be coming by the end of the year.[41] The film topped the NPD VideoScan overall disc sales chart for two consecutive weeks.[42][43] In the United States, the DVD and Blu-ray releases sold 2,027,137 units by December 2016 and have grossed $46 million as of August 2018.[44] It's available on Disney+ as of June 19, 2020.

Reception
Box office
The film became a huge financial success and a sleeper hit.[45] It briefly held the record for the biggest remake of all time until the studio's own Beauty and the Beast surpassed it the following year.[46] It grossed $364 million in the United States and Canada and $602.5 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $966.6 million, against a budget of $175 million.[2] Worldwide, the film was released across 28,000 RealD 3D screens[34] and had an IMAX worldwide opening of $20.4 million from 901 IMAX screens, a new record for a PG film.[47] It grossed a total of $39 million in IMAX screens worldwide.[48] On May 13, it became the second film of 2016 (after the studio's own Zootopia) to pass the $800 million mark.[49][50] On June 10, it became the third film of 2016 after Zootopia and Captain America: Civil War to pass the $900 million mark.[51] Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $258 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it the sixth-most profitable release of 2016.[52]

United States and Canada
Projections for its opening weekend in the United States and Canada were continuously revised upwards, starting from $60 million to as high as $88 million, with female and older male quadrants being the prime draw.[34][53][54][55] The Jungle Book was shown across 4,028 theaters of which 3,100 theaters (75%) were in 3D, including 376 IMAX screens, 463 premium large format screens, and 145 D-Box locations.[53][56][57] It opened Friday, April 15, 2016, on around 9,500 screens across 4,028 theaters, and earned $32.4 million, the fourth-biggest April Friday.[34][58] This includes $4.2 million from Thursday previews, the biggest preview number for a Disney live-adaptation film (tied with Maleficent),[59] an almost unheard-of for a PG title which rarely attracts many ticketbuyers later in the night.[60] In total, it earned $103.3 million in its opening weekend, exceeding expectations by 40% and recorded the biggest PG-rated April opening (breaking Hop's record), the second-biggest Disney live-action adaptation opening (behind Alice in Wonderland), and the second-biggest April opening (behind Furious 7).[34][61][62] It also performed exceptionally well in both 3D and IMAX formats, where they both generated an income of $44 million and $10.4 million of the film's opening-weekend gross, respectively, the later broke the record for the biggest April Disney release IMAX opening.[34][47] Notably, it also became the only second PG-rated release to ever open above $100 million (following Alice in Wonderland) and the third film of 2016 overall to open above $100 million (following Deadpool and Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice).[34][63] It earned $130.7 million in its first full week, the second-biggest for a Disney live-action adaptation, behind only Alice in Wonderland's $146.6 million seven-day gross.[64]

Buoyed by excellent word of mouth and benefiting from spring break, it fell only by 40% in its second weekend earning $61.5 million, still maintaining the top position and far surpassing newcomer The Huntsman: Winter's War.[65] That puts The Jungle Book in the top fifteen-second weekends of all time and in terms of films that opened above $100 million, it scored the fourth-smallest drop behind Shrek 2 (−33%), Spider-Man (−39%), and Star Wars: The Force Awakens (−39%).[66][67] Of those numbers, $5.6 million came from IMAX shows for a two weekend cumulative total of $18.4 million which represents about 10% of its entire North American box office gross.[65] It crossed $200 million on its twelfth day of release[68] and managed to hold the top spot for the third consecutive weekend with $43.7 million from 4,041 theaters (an addition of 13 more theaters), a fall of only 29%, outgrossing the next six pictures combined (including the openings of three newcomers)[69] and recorded the sixth-biggest third weekend of all time.[70] Moreover, the 29% drop is the smallest third-weekend drop (from its second weekend) for a $100 million opener ever.[70] Disney added an additional 103 theaters for the film's fourth weekend of release which propelled its theater count to 4,144 theaters,[71] but nevertheless, it was overtaken by Disney's own Captain America: Civil War after experiencing a 50% decline.[72][73] It passed $300 million on its thirtieth day of release, on May 14, as it continued to witness marginal declines in the wake of several new releases weekend after weekend.[74] It made 3.53 times its opening weekend numbers, which is one of the biggest of all time for a film opening above $100 million. It became one of the few surprise hits and one of the highest-grossing films of the year, alongside Finding Dory, The Secret Life of Pets, and Zootopia, centered around talking animals to dominate the year-end chart.[45]

Other countries
The film was released in approximately 70 countries.[75] Outside the US and Canada, it opened across 15 markets and 69 IMAX screens a week ahead of its US debut, and faced notable competition from newcomer The Huntsman: Winter's War and holdover Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, the latter of which was entering its third weekend. The reason behind the divided release pattern was because Disney wanted to get some space before Captain America: Civil War releases in early May, as well as availing school holidays and avoiding local competitors.[76] It eventually grossed $31.7 million, debuting at first place in all markets and second overall at the international box office, behind Dawn of Justice, which was playing across 67 markets.[76] In its second weekend, it expanded to an additional 49 countries (88% of its total marketplace) and grossed $138.6 million from 64 countries, easily topping the international box office, a bulk of it came from China.[77] Approximately 63% or $85 million of that came from 3D screenings, with the largest 3D opening haul represented by China (98%), Germany (83%), Brazil (73%), Russia (60%), Mexico (47%), and the UK (39%).[77] $10 million alone came from 525 IMAX screens, a record for a PG and April release.[47] It further continued to hold the top spot in its third weekend after adding another $98.9 million from 53 territories, falling only by a marginal 32%. IMAX generated another $6.1 million from 484 IMAX theaters for a three-weekend total of $20.6 million.[48] After three straight No. 1 runs, it was finally dethroned by the studio's Captain America: Civil War in its fourth weekend.[78]

In India, it scored the second-biggest opening day for a Hollywood film, earning $1.51 million (behind Avengers: Age of Ultron) from around 1,500 screens[79] and went on to score the second-biggest Hollywood opening weekend of all time, with $8.4 million from 1,600 screens, behind only Furious 7 in terms of local as well as U.S. currency,[80][81] performing better than expected and its initial $5–6 million opening projection.[79] Its opening weekend in India alone surpassed the entire lifetime total of Disney's other live-fantasy adaptations—Cinderella, Maleficent, Oz the Great and Powerful, and Alice in Wonderland—in the country.[76] It then went on to score the biggest opening and single week for a Hollywood film with $15.1 million.[75][82] In its second weekend, it dropped just by a mere 40% to $4.97 million.[83] In just ten days, it became the fourth-highest-grossing Hollywood film there with $21.2 million.[61] On Wednesday, April 19—its twelfth day of release—it surpassed Furious 7 to become the highest-grossing Hollywood/foreign release of all time there.[84][85] By the end of its theatrical run, the film made an estimated $38.8 million with half of its revenue—58%—coming from local dubbed versions, compared to Avengers: Age of Ultron, which saw 45% of its revenue from dubbed versions.[86]

In China, where the film was locally known as Fantasy Forest, expectations were high, with projections going as high $154–200 million or more.[87][88][89][90] Ultimately, it was unable to hit these marks.[74] Before the release of the film in the state, Disney had a very successful run at the box office with Zootopia the previous month, in which anthropomorphic animals were the central figure.[91] Forbes noted that The Jungle Book was precisely the sort of film that Chinese audiences love with its 3D visuals, heartwarming story, and talking animal cast.[88] It earned around $12 million on its opening day, including $300,000 worth of previews from 65,000 screenings.[88] Buoyed by good word of mouth and positive reception (albeit mostly from audiences with polarized reception from Chinese critics),[92] it rose 72% on its second day to $20 million.[90] Through its opening weekend it grossed $48.5 million, including $5.1 million from 279 IMAX screens, a new record for April release.[61][93] Its opening marked the biggest Walt Disney Pictures film opening ever,[94] the second-biggest for a family film (behind Kung Fu Panda 3), the second-biggest April debut (behind Furious 7), and the fourth-biggest Disney opening (behind Avengers: Age of Ultron, Iron Man 3, and Star Wars: The Force Awakens).[95] It topped the daily box office through the whole opening week and went on to remain at the top of the box office for a second weekend, after dropping by a mere 20% to $29.8 million, despite facing some competitions.[96] It ended its run there with a total of $150.1 million after thirty days of playing in theaters, adding $1.2 million on its last day. Albeit falling just below expectations, it nevertheless emerged as a huge financial success and becoming the fourth-biggest Disney release there.[74][97]

In the United Kingdom and Ireland, it had an opening weekend total of £9.9 million ($14.1 million) from 594 theaters[98] and in France with $8.1 million.[77] Elsewhere, the highest openings were recorded in Russia and the CIS ($7.4 million), Germany ($5.1 million), Spain ($3.9 million), Australia ($2.8 million), Argentina ($2.3 million), and in Malaysia, where it scored the biggest opening weekend for a live-action Disney film with $2.3 million.[76][77] In the UK, it became the first film of 2016 to earn over £5 million in three straight weekends and the first film since Jurassic World, Spectre, and Star Wars: The Force Awakens (all 2015 films) to achieve such an accomplishment,[99] and the first film of 2016 to earn above £40 million ($58 million).[100] In South Korea, it faced competition with Warcraft, but ended up debuting atop the charts with $6.2 million.[101] It has so far grossed a total of $18 million there.[102]

It opened in Japan on August 11, alongside the superhero film X-Men: Apocalypse[94][103] and delivered a four-day opening of $6.2 million from 676 screens ($3 million in two days), debuting at second place behind The Secret Life of Pets. Although the opening figure was considered mediocre, Deadline Hollywood noted that Japan is a market that can see big multiples.[104][105] It fell just 30% in its second weekend earning $2.1 million for an eleven-day total of $13.7 million.[106][107]

In total earnings, its biggest markets outside of the US and Canada were China ($150.1 million), the United Kingdom ($66.2 million) and India ($38.8 million).[97] It was the highest-grossing film of 2016 in Europe with a total of $209 million,[108] the United Kingdom and Ireland,[109] and in India (although it was later surpassed by Sultan, in terms of Hollywood/imported films, it is still the biggest).[110]

Critical response



(L to R) The vocal performances of Bill Murray, Idris Elba, and Ben Kingsley were particularly praised.[111][112][113][114]
The film garnered widespread critical acclaim from critics and audiences. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 94% based on 320 reviews, with an average rating of 7.73/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "As lovely to behold as it is engrossing to watch, The Jungle Book is the rare remake that actually improves upon its predecessors - all while setting a new standard for CGI".[115] On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 77 out of 100, based on 49 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[116] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported moviegoers gave it an overall positive score of 92%. Ninety-seven percent of the audience gave the film an A or a B, and it got A's from both the under- and over-25 crowd and A+ among those under 18 years of age and also for the over-50 audience.[34]

Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "Exceptionally beautiful to behold and bolstered by a stellar vocal cast, this umpteenth film rendition of Rudyard Kipling's tales of young Mowgli's adventures amongst the creatures of the Indian jungle proves entirely engaging, even if it's ultimately lacking in subtext and thematic heft".[117] Andrew Barker of Variety felt that this version "can't rival the woolly looseness of Disney's 1967 animated classic, of course, but it succeeds on its own so well that such comparisons are barely necessary".[118] Robbie Collin of The Telegraph gave the film four stars out of five, and deemed it "a sincere and full-hearted adaptation that returns to Kipling for fresh inspiration".[119] Alonso Duralde of The Wrap says "This 'Book' might lack the post-vaudeville razzamatazz of its predecessor, but director Jon Favreau and a team of effects wizards plunge us into one of the big screen's most engrossing artificial worlds since Avatar."[120] Peter Bradshaw, writing for The Guardian, gave the film four out of five stars and felt that the film had a touch of Apocalypto in it, finding the plot elements to be similar to those in The Lion King. He wrote that the film was "spectacular, exciting, funny and fun" and that it "handsomely revives the spirit of Disney's original film".[121] Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood wrote that the film had laughs, excitement, an exceptional voice cast and, most importantly, a lot of heart, calling it a cinematic achievement like no other. He particularly praised Murray's performance and the visual effects, deeming it "simply astonishing".[122] Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly graded the film an "A–", calling it one of the biggest surprises of 2016. He, however, felt the two songs were rather unnecessary and distracting, and believed the film to be a little too frightening for children.[123]

Richard Roeper of Chicago Sun-Times awarded the film three-and-a-half stars, pointing out the CGI as the apex achievement of the film. He labelled it "a beautifully rendered, visually arresting take on Rudyard Kipling's oft-filmed tales" but found the musical numbers to be trivial, saying that without the musical numbers, the film might have been a more exhilarating streamlined adventure.[124] Los Angeles Times' Kenneth Turan remarked that "The Jungle Book is the kind of family film calculated to make even those without families wish they had one to take along".[125] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone awarded the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, labeling it scary and thrilling, yet unique and unforgettable, and adding that it "fills us with something rare in movies today—a sense of wonder".[126] The Village Voice's Bilge Ebiri hailed the film as fast and light and that it "manages to be just scary enough to make us feel the danger of solitude in the middle of a massive jungle, but never indulgent or gratuitous".[127] Cath Clarke of Time Out compared Elba's character of Shere Khan to Scar from The Lion King, calling him "baddie of the year".[128] Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com also had high praise for Elba's portrayal of Shere Khan stating: "His loping menace is envisioned so powerfully that he'd be scary no matter what, but the character becomes a great villain through imaginative empathy. We understand and appreciate his point-of-view, even though carrying it out would mean the death of Mowgli".[113]

The film's visual effects and 3D photography were compared to those of Avatar, Gravity, Hugo, and Life of Pi.[120][129][130] Sarah Ward of Screen International wrote that the level of detail on display in the film "is likely to evoke the same jaw-dropping reaction as James Cameron's box office topper".[131] Entertainment Weekly called it "one of the few 3D movies that actually benefit from being in 3D".[123] The film also had a positive reception from Indian contemporary critics and publications,[132] such as The Times of India,[133] The Hindu,[134] India Today,[135] The Indian Express,[136] and The Economic Times.[137]

The film also had its share of criticism with most reviewers criticizing the inconsistent tone of the film and the director's indecision to stick to one vision. The New York Times's Manohla Dargis was less enthusiastic.[138] Sam C. Mac of Slant Magazine wrote, "Jon Favreau draws heavily on his film's animated predecessor for plot, characterizations, songs, and set pieces, but doesn't know how to fit these familiar elements into his own coherent vision".[139] Josh Spiegel of Movie Mezzanine also echoed these feelings, saying that the film "stumbles because the people involved aren't willing to fully commit to either making a near-shot-for-shot remake or going in a completely different direction".[140] Rene Rodriguez of the Miami Herald felt that the movie was soulless, writing that "The better these talking beasts look, the more the film resembles a gorgeous screen saver. You admire The Jungle Book, but you can't lose yourself in it".[141]

Accolades
Main article: List of accolades received by The Jungle Book (2016 film)
Sequel
Following the film's financial and critical success, the studio has begun working on a sequel. Jon Favreau and Justin Marks were in talks to return as director and writer respectively while Brigham Taylor was confirmed to be returning as producer.[142] Shortly after the release of the film, Favreau and Marks signed on to direct and write the sequel, and it could potentially have a release sometime in the fall of 2019 and will be shot back-to-back with Favreau's remake of The Lion King.[143][144][145] But in March 2017, it was reported that the sequel was put on hold so that Favreau would have to focus mainly on The Lion King instead.[146] By January 2018, Marks finished an early draft for the sequel, which he said will "go further through" Kipling's material, as well as feature elements of Bill Peet's rejected drafts for the 1967 film.[147] In October 2018, Neel Sethi confirmed that he will reprise his role as Mowgli in the sequel.[148]

References
 "The Jungle Book (2016)". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on September 26, 2016. Retrieved January 23, 2020.
 "The Jungle Book (2016)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 4, 2020.
 FilmL.A. (May 23, 2017). "2016 Feature Film Study" (PDF). FilmL.A. Feature Film Study: Page 25. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved May 10, 2018.
 "The Jungle Book (2016)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved December 12, 2016.
 "The Jungle Book: Production Notes" (PDF). wdsmediafile.com. The Walt Disney Studios. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2016.
 Thompson, Luke Y. (February 22, 2016). "Jon Favreau Says 'The Jungle Book' Will Be His 'Avatar,' Reveals New Images". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 26, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Turan, Kenneth (April 14, 2016). "'Jungle Book' is a sweet and scary triumph of modern moviemaking". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Graser, Marc (July 15, 2014). "Disney's 'The Jungle Book' Finds its Mowgli in Newcomer Neel Sethi". Variety. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved December 13, 2014.
 "The Jungle Book: Press Kit" (PDF). wdsmediafile.com. The Walt Disney Studios. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved March 29, 2016.
 Rebecca Keegan (April 15, 2016). "'Jungle Book' director Jon Favreau keeps the 19th century Kipling tone but updates the classic for modern times". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2016.
 Buchanan, Kyle (February 22, 2016). "Jon Favreau on the Subtle SFX Beauty of The Jungle Book and Casting Lupita Nyong'o". New York. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Errico, Marcus (September 15, 2015). "Jon Favreau Breaks Down Disney's Live-Action 'Jungle Book' Teaser: From the Digital Toolbox to the 'Bear Necessities'". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on October 4, 2015. Retrieved September 17, 2015.
 Sperling, Nicole (April 18, 2016). "Inside The Jungle Book's king-sized change to King Louie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016.
 Giardina, Carolyn (April 15, 2016). "'The Jungle Book': How Jon Favreau Juggled Walt Disney's Legacy and Digital Effects That Go Beyond 'Avatar'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Rawal, Sugandha (February 24, 2016). "Jon Favreau breathes new life to Kipling classic 'The Jungle Book'". Business Standard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 The Deadline Team (July 9, 2013). "Justin Marks To Adapt Live-Action 'Jungle Book' Reboot At Disney". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 13, 2014. Retrieved December 13, 2014.
 Johnson, Zach (April 15, 2016). "Remember When Disney Made 2 Jungle Book Movies in the '90s?". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 10, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018.
 Kit, Borys. "Jon Favreau in Talks to Direct 'Jungle Book' for Disney". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 6, 2015. Retrieved December 13, 2014.
 Rainey, James (February 22, 2016). "How Jon Favreau Combined CGI and One Real Boy to Remake 'The Jungle Book'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 27, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Taylor, Drew. "9 Things Disney Fans Need to Know About The Jungle Book, According to Jon Favreau". Disney Insider. The Walt Disney Company. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 "Disney producer Brigham Taylor shares insights into 'The Jungle Book'". Archived from the original on June 23, 2019. Retrieved June 22, 2019.
 Mallenbaum, Carly (September 15, 2015). "CGI power! 'The Jungle Book' was shot entirely in downtown L.A." USA Today. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Alexander, Bryan (April 10, 2016). "Human Mowgli is at the heart of 'Jungle Book'". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016.
 Giardina, Carolyn (February 16, 2016). "Virtual Production for 'Jungle Book' Detailed During HPA Tech Retreat". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Desowitz, Bill (April 22, 2016). "'The Jungle Book': How They Pulled Off the Oscar-Bound VFX Hybrid". Indiewire. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. Retrieved April 24, 2016.
 Reif, Alex (April 15, 2016). "Fantasound Returns in 2016 with the Jungle Book". Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2016.
 "John Debney to Score Jon Favreau's 'The Jungle Book'". Film Music Reporter. August 7, 2014. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 23, 2016.
https://web.archive.org/web/20141225200209/http://news.moviefone.com/2014/12/23/richard-sherman-jungle-book/
 Gilsdorf, Ethan (April 8, 2016). "Jon Favreau brings CG realism to 'The Jungle Book'". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 "Walt Disney Records Set To Release The Jungle Book Original Motion Picture Soundtrack" (Press release). PR Newswire. Burbank, California: Walt Disney Records. April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Kit, Borys (November 23, 2014). "Warner Bros. Pushes Release Date of 'Jungle Book: Origins'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2015.
 Pamela McClintock. "Jon Favreau's 'Jungle Book' Switches Places With 'Finest Hours,' Pushed to Spring 2016". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 19, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2015.
 Carolyn Giardina (November 16, 2015). "'Star Wars' Dolby Cinema Release Could Push Forward the New Format". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 17, 2015.
 Anita Busch (April 17, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Wild With $101M To $103.6M; 'Barbershop' Cuts $20M+; 'Criminal' In Cooler — Box Office Sunday AM". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016.
 Fatema Etemadi; Maya Anderma (April 7, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' Premiere: Hollywood Reflects on a Disney Classic". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 "The Jungle Book: 5 reasons you should watch Jon Favreau film with your kids this weekend". The Indian Express. April 8, 2016. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 Kenneth Rapoza (April 10, 2016). "What Indians Are Really Saying About Disney's 'The Jungle Book'". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2016.
 Bhushan, Nyay (April 15, 2016). "Irrfan Khan On Why 'The Jungle Book' Has Resonated in India". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 18, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Child, Ben (April 8, 2016). "Disney's Jungle Book remake branded 'too scary for kids' by Indian censor". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2016.
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved August 24, 2016.
 "Disney's The Jungle Book Blu-ray and Digital HD Details". Comingsoon.net. July 7, 2016. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2016.
 Thomas K. Arnold (September 8, 2016). "'Jungle Book,' 'Me Before You' Debut at Top of Disc Sales Charts". Variety. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved July 27, 2017.
 Thomas K. Arnold (September 14, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' Notches Second Week Atop Disc Charts". Variety. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved July 27, 2017.
 "The Jungle Book (2016) - Video Sales". The Numbers. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018.
 Scott Mendelson (August 30, 2016). "Moviegoers Flocking To Superhero Films, Talking Animal Toons And Almost Nothing Else". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 31, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016.
 Tom Grater (April 22, 2017). "How well do Hollywood remakes fare at the box office?". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on April 23, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017.
 Scott Mendelson (April 17, 2016). "Box Office: 'Jungle Book' Rules With A Mighty $103M Weekend". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (April 24, 2016). "'Jungle Book' A $337M Offshore Beast As 'Huntsman' Musters $80M; 'Zootopia' Tops $900M Global – Intl B.O. Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
 ""The Jungle Book" to Cross $800M Mark Globally". The Walt Disney Company. May 13, 2016. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016.
 Anita Busch (May 13, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Passes $500M Overseas On Way To $800M WW, To Top 'Deadpool' In UK". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 14, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016.
 Dave McNary (June 10, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Roars to $900 Million at Worldwide Box Office". Variety. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2016.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (March 29, 2017). "No. 6 'The Jungle Book' Box Office Profits – 2016 Most Valuable Movie Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2017.
 Anita Busch and Nancy Tartaglione (April 12, 2016). "'The Jungle Book', 'Barbershop: The Next Cut' To Ignite Weekend Box Office – Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016.
 Anthony D'Alessandro (March 28, 2016). "How 'Batman V Superman' Will Turn A Profit Despite Critical Kryptonite". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016.
 Ryan Faughnder (April 14, 2016). "'Jungle Book' expected to swing past $70 million in box office debut". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2016.
 Dave McMarry (April 12, 2016). "'Jungle Book' to Rule Box Office Kingdom With $70 Million Opening". Variety. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016.
 Brad Brevet (April 14, 2016). "'Jungle Book' and 'Barbershop 3' Seek Strong Opening Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 18, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2016.
 Scott Mendelson (April 16, 2016). "Friday Box Office: 'Jungle Book' Earns Huge $32.4M For $90-95M Weekend". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016.
 Pamela McClintock (April 15, 2016). "Box Office: Jon Favreau's 'Jungle Book' Swings to Stellar $4.2M Thursday Night". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 15, 2016.
 Pamela McClintock (April 17, 2016). "Box Office: 'Jungle Book' Overcomes PG Stigma, Wowing Audiences of All Ages". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016.
 Pamela McClintock (April 17, 2016). "Box Office: 'The Jungle Book' Scores Huge $103.6M U.S. Debut, Climbs to $291M Globally". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016.
 Brooks Barnes (April 17, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Captivates Moviegoers and Captures Box Office". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 25, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2016.
 Brad Brevet (April 17, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Opens with Massive $103 Million, Global Cume Tops $290M". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016.
 Scott Mendelson (April 22, 2016). "Box Office: 'Jungle Book' Ends First Week With $130M U.S., Tops $400M Worldwide Today". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2016.
 Anthony D'Alessandro (April 23, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Still A Box Office Bestseller With $60.8M, 'Huntsman' Trips With $20.1M – Saturday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved April 24, 2016.
 Scott Mendelson (April 24, 2016). "Box Office: 'The Jungle Book' Tops With Huge $60M Weekend, 'Batman V Superman' Passes 'Iron Man'". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved April 24, 2016.
 Brad Brevet (April 24, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Repeats, 'Huntsman' Falls On His Axe and 'Zootopia' Tops $900M Worldwide". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 27, 2016. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
 Scott Mendelson (April 27, 2016). "Box Office: Disney's 'Jungle Book' Tops $200M U.S. In Just 12 Days". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 27, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016.
 Anthony D'Alessandro and Anita Busch (May 2, 2016). "'Jungle Book' King Again, Reigns On Newcomer Parade: 'Keanu', 'Mother's Day' & 'Ratchet & Clank' – Monday Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 3, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2016.
 Scott Mendelson (May 3, 2016). "Box Office: 'The Jungle Book' Snags Record-Low Third Weekend Plunge For A $100M+ Opener". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 3, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2016.
 Brad Brevet (May 5, 2016). "Weekend Forecast: 'Captain America: Civil War' Looks to Become Fourth $200+ Million Opener". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016.
 Anthony D'Alessandro (May 8, 2016). "'Civil War' B.O. Slowed By Moms, But Still 5th-Best Opening Of All-Time With $178M – Monday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved May 8, 2016.
 Pamela McClintock (May 8, 2016). "Box Office: 'Captain America: Civil War' Opens to Mighty $181.8M in U.S., Hits $678.4M Globally". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved May 8, 2016.
 Scott Mendelson (May 15, 2016). "Weekend Box Office: 'The Jungle Book' Hits $828M, 'Mother's Day' Crumbles Again". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 15, 2016. Retrieved May 15, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (April 15, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' Swings With $57.1M Overseas Through Thursday – Intl Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (April 11, 2016). "'Batman V Superman' At $487.7M Offshore; 'Jungle Book' Swings With $31.7M; 'Huntsman' Misses Mark; 'Zootopia' Sets Dis China Record – Intl B.O. Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (April 17, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' Jumps To $138.6M; Passing $300M WW Today, 'Batman v Superman' At $829M WW – Intl B.O. Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 18, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (May 2, 2016). "'Captain America: Civil War' Grabs $200.4M In Debut; 'Jungle Book' A Beast, And With 'Zootopia' Disney Has $1.24B From Three Titles – Int'l Box Office Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2016.
 Rob Cain (April 9, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Rocks India's Box Office With Second Best Debut Ever For A Hollywood Film". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2016.
 Scott Mendelson (April 10, 2016). "Box Office: 'Batman V Superman' Nears $800M Worldwide, 'Jungle Book' And 'Huntsman' Open Overseas". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2016.
 Nyay Bhushan (April 13, 2016). "Indian Box Office: 'The Jungle Book' Second Highest Hollywood Opening Ever in India". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016.
 Dave McNarry (April 15, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Swings to $57 Million at International Box Office, Breaks Big Record in India". Variety. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Don Groves (April 17, 2016). "Back-End Profits In Prospect For Shah Rukh Khan's 'Fan'". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016.
 Nyay Bhushan (April 20, 2016). "India Box Office: 'Jungle Book' Becomes Top Hollywood Release Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016.
 Nyay Bhushan (August 26, 2016). "Disney India Getting Out of Bollywood Production (Report)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.
 Nyay Bhushan (March 21, 2017). "Hollywood Film Revenue in India Rises 10 Percent, Boosted by Dubbed Versions". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 7, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2017.
 Jonathan Papish (April 14, 2016). "On Screen China: Disney Hopes 'Jungle' will Rumble Box Office". China Film Insider. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Rob Cain (April 15, 2016). "Disney's 'Jungle Book' Swings In China To $12 Million Opening Day, 250% Better Than 'Zootopia'". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Rob Cain (April 12, 2016). "Box Office: 'The Jungle Book' Will Join The $1 Billion Club". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Rob Cain (April 16, 2016). "'Jungle Book' Flouts Bad Weather In China For $20 Million Saturday, Huge 72% Fri-Sat Jump". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016.
 Jonathan Papish (March 9, 2016). "Disney 'Jungle Book' China Date Follows 'Zootopia' Hit, Leads Shanghai Park". China Film Insider. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 Jonathan Papish (April 18, 2016). "China Box Office: 'Jungle Book' Swings $50 Million Opening for Disney". China Film Insider. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2016.
 Patrick Brzeski (April 18, 2016). "China Box Office: 'The Jungle Book' Goes Bananas With $50M Bow". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (May 31, 2016). "'Alice' Sees $62.7M In Offshore Looking Glass; 'Warcraft' Scores $31.7M; 'X-Men' Cumes $183.4M – Int'l Box Office Final". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 1, 2016.
 Rob Cain (April 17, 2016). "China Goes Wild For 'Jungle Book' With $50 Million Debut Weekend". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 18, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016.
 Patrick Frater (April 24, 2016). "China Box Office: 'Jungle Book' Holds Ahead of 'Huntsman,' 'Sassy Girl'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (May 16, 2016). "'Angry Birds Movie' Takes Off With $43M; 'Captain America: Civil War' Hits $647M Offshore, $943M WW – Intl B.O. Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016.
 Charles Gant (April 19, 2016). "The Jungle Book ahead of the pack in UK while Mirren eyes a hit". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016.
 Charles Gant (May 3, 2016). "Captain America unseats Jungle Book at UK box office". The Guardian. Retrieved May 4, 2016.
 Charles Gant (May 24, 2016). "X-Men gang up on an exhausted Captain America at UK box office". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 25, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (June 12, 2016). "'Warcraft' At $300M+ WW Through Monday With $156M China Weekend; 'Conjuring 2' Scares Up $51.5M – Int'l Box Office Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 13, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (July 3, 2016). "'Tarzan' Takes $18.8M In First Offshore Swing; 'TMNT2' Kicks Up $26M China Bow; 'Pets' Purrs – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 4, 2016. Retrieved July 3, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (June 26, 2016). "'Dory' Swims Past $100M Overseas; 'Pets' Is Cat's Meow In UK; 'Warcraft' Tops $400M WW – Intl Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 27, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (August 14, 2016). "'Suicide Squad' Rounds Up $243M Overseas & $465M Global Cumes; 'Pets' Prancing To $600M WW – Intl Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2016.
 Mark Schilling (August 15, 2016). "Japan Box Office: 'Pets' Goes Top as 'Shin Godzilla' Breaks Record". Variety. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (August 21, 2016). "'Pets' Pushes 'Suicide Squad' From #1 Offshore Perch, Collars $675M WW; Supervillains Gain On $600M – Intl B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2016.
 Gavin J. Blair (August 22, 2016). "Japan Box Office: 'Ghostbusters' Opens at No. 4 with $2.4M; 'Secret Life of Pets' Stays No. 1". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (June 5, 2016). "'TMNT 2' Powers Up $34M In Debut; 'Warcraft' Jumps To $70M Cume; 'X-Men' Crosses $400M WW – Intl B.O. Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 6, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2016.
 "United Kingdom and Ireland and Malta Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016.
 Nancy Tartaglione (July 5, 2016). "Salman Khan's 'Sultan' Goes To The Mat; Will Wrestling Drama Break Bollywood Bank?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 6, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016.
 Berardinelli, James. "Jungle Book, The (United States, 2016)". ReelViews. James Berardinelli. Archived from the original on April 18, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2016.
 Morgenstern, Joe. "'The Jungle Book' Review: Disney Goes Wild". The Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2016.
 Zoller Seitz, Matt. "THE JUNGLE BOOK". RogerEbert. Ebert Digital LLC. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2016.
 VanDerWerff, Todd. "The Jungle Book review: all of the talking animals, ranked". Vox. Vox Media. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2016.
 "The Jungle Book (2016)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 19, 2019.
 "The Jungle Book Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved May 8, 2016.
 McCarthy, Todd (April 3, 2016). "'The Jungle Book': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016.
 Barker, Andrew (April 3, 2016). "Film Review: 'The Jungle Book'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016.
 Collin, Robbie (April 3, 2016). "Forget about your worries, this new Jungle Book makes perfect sense — review". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016.
 Duralde, Alonso (April 3, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' Review: 'Babe' Meets Rudyard Kipling in Mostly Satisfying Remake". The Wrap. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016.
 Bradshaw, Peter (April 12, 2016). "The Jungle Book review – spectacular revival of Disney's family favourite". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016.
 Hammond, Pete (April 11, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' Review: Disney's New Version Is A Stunning Visual Marvel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016.
 Chris Nashawaty (April 12, 2016). "The Jungle Book: EW review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016.
 Richard Roeper (April 12, 2016). "'The Jungle Book': It all looks real as boy meets talking animals". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016.
 Kenneth Turan (April 14, 2016). "'Jungle Book' is a sweet and scary triumph of modern moviemaking". Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2016.
 Peter Travis (April 13, 2016). "MOVIE REVIEW The Jungle Book". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2016.
 Bilge Ebiri (April 12, 2016). "In 'The Jungle Book,' Disney Builds a Better Reboot". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016.
 Clarke, Cath (April 6, 2016). "The Jungle Book". Time Out. Archived from the original on April 6, 2016. Retrieved April 7, 2016.
 Han, Angie (April 4, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' Early Buzz: Critics Go Wild for Disney's 3D Remake". /Film. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016.
 Mendelson, Scott (April 4, 2016). "Review: Disney's 'The Jungle Book' Is A Towering Visual Achievement". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016.
 Ward, Sarah (April 3, 2016). "'The Jungle Book': Review". Screen International. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2016.
 Mehta, Ankita (April 7, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' movie review round-up: What critics have to say about Neel Sethi-starrer". International Business Times. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 Rasquinha, Reagan Gavin (April 7, 2016). "The Jungle Book Movie Review". The Times of India. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 Ghosh, Sankhayan (April 7, 2016). "The Jungle Book: The law of the jungle prevails". The Hindu. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 Bhattacharya, Ananya (April 8, 2016). "The Jungle Book movie review: Neel Sethi brings alive Rudyard Kipling's Mowgli". India Today. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 Langer, Shalini (April 8, 2016). "The Jungle Book movie review, four stars". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 Balapurwala, Tasneem (April 8, 2016). "'The Jungle Book' review: A visual and aural treat!". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016.
 Manohla Dargis (April 14, 2016). "Review: Recycled 'Jungle Book' Puts a Real Boy in a Forest of Pixels". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 25, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2016.
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved February 19, 2020.
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2017.
 http://www.miami.com/039the-jungle-book039-soulless-adventure-pg-article
 Kit, Borys (April 11, 2016). "'Jungle Book 2' in the Works With Jon Favreau, Justin Marks (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016.
 McClintock, Pamela (April 25, 2016). "Disney Stakes Out Release Dates for 'Jungle Book 2,' 'Maleficent 2' and More". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
 Lang, Brent (April 25, 2016). "Disney Claims Dates for Several New Movies; Confirms 'Jungle Book 2,' 'Mary Poppins' Sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on April 27, 2016. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
 Foutch, Haleigh (December 1, 2016). "Jon Favreau Offers Updates on 'The Lion King' and 'The Jungle Book 2'". Collider. Archived from the original on January 7, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (March 21, 2017). "Sean Bailey On How Disney's Live-Action Division Found Its 'Beauty And The Beast' Mojo". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017. Retrieved February 19, 2020. Jungle Book director Favreau has temporarily put down a sequel for that film to instead focus on a live-action musical version of The Lion King, one that will take The Jungle Book‘s photo-realistic technology further, and will fully exploit the Elton John songs from the original
 Topel, Fred (June 12, 2018). "'The Jungle Book 2' Will Resurrect Unused Disney Ideas, Explore More Rudyard Kipling Stories". Slashfilm. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved January 11, 2019.
 Hamad, Marwa (October 17, 2018). "'Jungle Book' actor Neel Sethi eyes superhero films". Gulf News. Archived from the original on December 7, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2019.
External links
icon	Disney portal
	Film portal
flag	United States portal
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: The Jungle Book (2016 film)
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
The Jungle Book on IMDb
vte
Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book
vte
Disney's live-action/CGI adaptations of animated franchises
vte
The Sherman Brothers
vte
Jon Favreau
vte
Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film
Categories: 2016 filmsEnglish-language films2016 3D films2016 computer-animated films2010s coming-of-age films2010s fantasy adventure films3D animated filmsAmerican 3D filmsAmerican filmsAmerican adventure drama filmsAmerican children's adventure filmsAmerican computer-animated filmsAmerican coming-of-age filmsAmerican fantasy adventure filmsAnnie Award winnersBAFTA winners (films)Disney film remakesFantasy drama filmsFilms about animalsFilms about bearsFilms about orphansFilms about snakesFilms about tigersFilms scored by John DebneyFilms directed by Jon FavreauFilms produced by Jon FavreauFilms featuring anthropomorphic charactersFilms featuring hypnosisFilms set in 1893Films set in forestsFilms set in IndiaFilms shot in Los AngelesFilms using computer-generated imageryFilms with live action and animationFilms based on adaptationsFilms based on multiple worksFilms that won the Best Visual Effects Academy AwardIMAX filmsJungle adventure filmsThe Jungle Book filmsThe Jungle Book (franchise)Motion capture in filmFilm remakesWalt Disney Pictures filmsWolves in film
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
Español
Русский
中文
فارسی
العربية
Bahasa Indonesia
हिन्दी
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
اردو
45 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 14 July 2020, at 15:45 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Click here for more information.  Page semi-protected
Avengers: Infinity War
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Infinity War" redirects here. For other uses, see Infinity War (disambiguation).
Avengers: Infinity War
Avengers Infinity War poster.jpg
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	
Anthony Russo
Joe Russo
Produced by	Kevin Feige
Screenplay by	
Christopher Markus
Stephen McFeely
Based on	
The Avengers
by Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
Starring	
Robert Downey Jr.
Chris Hemsworth
Mark Ruffalo
Chris Evans
Scarlett Johansson
Benedict Cumberbatch
Don Cheadle
Tom Holland
Chadwick Boseman
Paul Bettany
Elizabeth Olsen
Anthony Mackie
Sebastian Stan
Danai Gurira
Letitia Wright
Dave Bautista
Zoe Saldana
Josh Brolin
Chris Pratt
Music by	Alan Silvestri
Cinematography	Trent Opaloch
Edited by	
Jeffrey Ford
Matthew Schmidt
Production
company
Marvel Studios
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Release date
April 23, 2018 (Dolby Theatre)
April 27, 2018 (United States)
Running time
149 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	$316–400 million[2][3][4]
Box office	$2.048 billion[5]
Avengers: Infinity War is a 2018 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team the Avengers, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. It is the sequel to The Avengers (2012) and Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015), and the 19th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). It was directed by Anthony and Joe Russo, written by Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely, and features an ensemble cast including Robert Downey Jr., Chris Hemsworth, Mark Ruffalo, Chris Evans, Scarlett Johansson, Benedict Cumberbatch, Don Cheadle, Tom Holland, Chadwick Boseman, Paul Bettany, Elizabeth Olsen, Anthony Mackie, Sebastian Stan, Danai Gurira, Letitia Wright, Dave Bautista, Zoe Saldana, Josh Brolin, and Chris Pratt. In the film, the Avengers and the Guardians of the Galaxy attempt to prevent Thanos from collecting the six all-powerful Infinity Stones as part of his quest to kill half of all life in the universe.

The film was announced in October 2014 as Avengers: Infinity War – Part 1. The Russo brothers came on board to direct in April 2015, and a month later Markus and McFeely had signed on to write the script for the film, which draws inspiration from Jim Starlin's 1991 comic book The Infinity Gauntlet and Jonathan Hickman's 2013 comic book Infinity. In 2016, Marvel shortened the title to Avengers: Infinity War. Filming began in January 2017 at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County, Georgia, with a large cast consisting mostly of actors reprising their roles from previous MCU films, including Brolin as Thanos. The production lasted until July 2017, shooting back-to-back with a direct sequel, Avengers: Endgame. Additional filming took place in Scotland, the Downtown Atlanta area, and New York City. With an estimated budget of $316–400 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

Avengers: Infinity War held its world premiere on April 23, 2018, in Los Angeles, and was released in the United States on April 27, as part of Phase Three of the MCU. Brolin's performance was praised, as was the emotional weight of the story, the visual effects, and action sequences, but the film was criticized for relying on previous MCU films for its story. It has been featured in multiple listings of the best films of the 2010s. It was the fourth film and the first superhero film to gross over $2 billion worldwide, breaking numerous box office records. It became the highest-grossing film of 2018 and the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time both worldwide and in the United States and Canada. The film's visual effects were nominated at the 91st Academy Awards, 24th Critics' Choice Awards, and 72nd British Academy Film Awards. The sequel, Avengers: Endgame, was released in April 2019.


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
4	Music
5	Marketing
6	Release
6.1	Theatrical
6.2	Home media
7	Reception
7.1	Box office
7.2	Critical response
7.3	Audience response
7.4	Accolades
8	Sequel
9	See also
10	Notes
11	References
12	External links
Plot
Having acquired the Power Stone, one of the six Infinity Stones, from the planet Xandar, Thanos and his lieutenants—Ebony Maw, Cull Obsidian, Proxima Midnight, and Corvus Glaive—intercept the spaceship carrying the survivors of Asgard's recent destruction.[N 1] As they extract the Space Stone from the Tesseract, Thanos subdues Thor, overpowers Hulk, and kills Loki. Thanos also kills Heimdall after he sends Hulk to Earth using the Bifröst. Thanos and his lieutenants depart, destroying the ship.

Hulk crash-lands in the Sanctum Sanctorum in New York City, reverting to the form of Bruce Banner. He warns Stephen Strange and Wong about Thanos' plan to kill half of all life in the universe, and they recruit Tony Stark. Maw and Obsidian arrive to retrieve the Time Stone from Strange, drawing the attention of Peter Parker. Maw is unable to take the Time Stone due to an enchantment and captures Strange instead. Stark and Parker sneak aboard Maw's spaceship while Wong stays behind to guard the Sanctum.

In Edinburgh, Midnight and Glaive ambush Wanda Maximoff and Vision in order to retrieve the Mind Stone, which is in Vision's forehead. Steve Rogers, Natasha Romanoff, and Sam Wilson rescue them and they take shelter with James Rhodes and Banner at Avengers Compound. Vision asks Maximoff to destroy himself and the Mind Stone to keep Thanos from retrieving it, but Maximoff refuses. Rogers suggests they travel to Wakanda, which he believes has the resources to remove the Stone without killing Vision.

The Guardians of the Galaxy respond to a distress call from the Asgardian ship and rescue Thor, who surmises that Thanos is currently going after the Reality Stone, which is in the possession of the Collector on Knowhere. Rocket and Groot accompany Thor to Nidavellir, where they and Eitri create Stormbreaker, a battle-axe capable of killing Thanos. On Knowhere, Peter Quill, Gamora, Drax, and Mantis find Thanos with the Reality Stone already in his possession. Thanos kidnaps Gamora, his adopted daughter, who reveals the Soul Stone is on Vormir in order to save her captive adopted sister, Nebula, from torture. On Vormir, the Stone's keeper, Red Skull, tells Thanos that he can only acquire it by sacrificing someone he loves. Thanos kills Gamora, earning the Stone.

Nebula escapes captivity and asks the remaining Guardians to meet her at Thanos' destroyed homeworld, Titan. Stark and Parker kill Maw and rescue Strange. Landing on Titan, they meet Quill, Drax, and Mantis. Strange uses the Time Stone to view millions of possible futures, seeing only one in which Thanos loses. The group forms a plan to subdue Thanos and remove the Infinity Gauntlet, which he uses to house the Stones. Thanos appears and justifies his plans as necessary to ensure the survival of a universe threatened by overpopulation. Nebula arrives soon after, and helps the others subdue Thanos until she deduces that Thanos has killed Gamora. Enraged, Quill attacks Thanos, allowing him to break the group's hold and overpower them. Stark is seriously wounded by Thanos, but is spared after Strange surrenders the Time Stone to Thanos.

In Wakanda, Rogers reunites with Bucky Barnes before Thanos' army invades. The Avengers, alongside T'Challa and the Wakandan forces, mount a defense while Shuri works to extract the Mind Stone from Vision. Hulk refuses to fight after losing to Thanos, so Banner fights in Stark's Hulkbuster armor. Thor, Rocket, and Groot arrive to reinforce the Avengers; Midnight, Obsidian, and Glaive are killed and their army is routed, but Shuri is unable to complete the extraction of the Mind Stone from Vision before Thanos arrives to retrieve it. Maximoff destroys the Mind Stone and Vision, but Thanos uses the Time Stone to reverse her actions. He rips the repaired Mind Stone from Vision's forehead, killing him. Thor severely wounds Thanos with Stormbreaker, but Thanos activates the completed Gauntlet by snapping his fingers. He then teleports away.

Half of all life across the universe disintegrates, including Barnes, T'Challa, Groot, Maximoff, Wilson, Mantis, Drax, Quill, Strange, and Parker, as well as Maria Hill and Nick Fury, although Fury is able to transmit an emergency signal on a modified pager before turning to dust.[N 2] Stark and Nebula remain on Titan while Banner, M'Baku, Okoye, Rhodes, Rocket, Rogers, Romanoff, and Thor are left on the Wakandan battlefield. Meanwhile, Thanos watches a sunrise on a peaceful planet.

Cast
Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man: 
The leader and benefactor of the Avengers who is a self-described genius, billionaire, playboy, and philanthropist with electromechanical suits of armor of his own making.[7][8] Co-director Joe Russo explained that Stark "senses this greater threat approaching, so he is doing everything in his power to keep the Earth safe".[9] Downey added that Stark has smaller goals than in previous films.[10]
Chris Hemsworth as Thor: 
An Avenger and the king of Asgard, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name.[11] Joe Russo stated that Thor's storyline picks up after the events of Thor: Ragnarok (2017), which finds him in a "very profound... very interesting place" with "real emotional motivation".[12] At the recommendation of Hemsworth, writers Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely consulted Thor: Ragnarok director Taika Waititi and screenwriter Eric Pearson to help carry over the comedic and tragic elements of the re-toned Thor from that film.[13] Joe Russo said that Thor has "the driving hero's arc of the movie which stands in direct opposition to Thanos' argument" and would have been the main protagonist of the film had Thor killed Thanos.[14]
Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner / Hulk: 
An Avenger and genius scientist who, because of exposure to gamma radiation, typically transforms into a monster when enraged or agitated.[15][16] Banner spends the film trying to reintegrate with the Avengers and "impress upon everybody how dangerous Thanos is".[17] Joe Russo felt the Hulk refusing to appear for much of the film was only partially because he was scared, but also because he realizes that "Banner only wants Hulk for fighting. I think he's had enough of saving Banner's ass". Russo added that this was "really reflective of the journey from Ragnarok... [where] these two characters are constantly in conflict with each other over control".[18] Banner's appearance in the film continues a story arc for the character that was established in Thor: Ragnarok and concludes in Avengers: Endgame,[19] with the difference between Hulk and Banner "starting to blur a little bit". Ruffalo described Hulk in Infinity War as having the mental capacity of a five-year-old.[17]
Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America: 
The fugitive leader of the non-regulation faction of Avengers. A World War II veteran, he was enhanced to the peak of human physicality by an experimental serum and frozen in suspended animation before waking up in the modern world.[11] Joe Russo said after the events of Captain America: Civil War (2016), Rogers struggles with the conflict between his responsibility to himself and his responsibility to o
2976- hers. The character embodies the "spirit" of the comic book identity Nomad in the film,[20] and receives new vibranium gauntlets from Shuri to replace his traditional shield.[21] An early draft of the film had Rogers first appearing at the end of the film to save Vision from Corvus Glaive in Wakanda. Markus and McFeely were called "insane" for waiting that long to introduce Rogers into the film and ultimately conceded it was "not [a] satisfying" approach.[22]
Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow: 
A highly trained spy, member of Rogers's faction of Avengers, and former agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.[23][24] Johansson said that Romanoff's situation following Captain America: Civil War has been "a dark time. I wouldn't say that my character has been particularly hopeful, but I think she's hardened even more than she probably was before."[25]
Benedict Cumberbatch as Dr. Stephen Strange: 
A former neurosurgeon who, after a car accident that led to a journey of healing, discovered the hidden world of magic and alternate dimensions and became a Master of the Mystic Arts.[26] Markus and McFeely described Strange as "[ending] up being the reasonable adult in the room" with the "widest perspective available".[27] Aaron Lazar served as Cumberbatch's stand-in until the latter completed filming on The Current War (2017). At that point, Cumberbatch re-shot scenes where his face needed to be seen.[28] Julian "JayFunk" Daniels once again assisted Cumberbatch with his finger-tutting movements.[29]
Don Cheadle as James "Rhodey" Rhodes / War Machine: 
A colonel in the U.S. Air Force and Avenger who operates the War Machine armor.[30] Following his paralysis during the events of Civil War, Rhodes is given an apparatus by Stark to walk again, although he is reluctant to don his War Machine armor and rejoin the Avengers due to his injury. Cheadle believed that Rhodes is "negotiating this reunion and his rejoining this team". He also explained that Rhodes's relationship with Stark "deepened" from his accident, saying, "I think Tony feels somewhat responsible and culpable in a way. But again, he's always had my back in a way that only he could really have".[31]
Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider-Man: 
A teenager and Stark's protegé who received spider-like abilities after being bitten by a radioactive spider.[9] Downey helped coach Holland through his death scene, which was not as drawn out in the script. Anthony Russo said, Downey "kept driving: put more and more emotion into it, and just went up to Tom and said, 'You don't want to go because you're a child. And you're using your strength as Spider-Man to fight this. And then that was the performance that came out".[32]
Chadwick Boseman as T'Challa / Black Panther: 
The king of the African nation of Wakanda who gained his enhanced strength by ingesting the Heart-Shaped Herb.[24][33] Boseman, along with the other actors from Black Panther (2018) portraying Wakandans, improvised their war chants on set ahead of the battle in Wakanda. Despite both Black Panther and Infinity War filming at the same time, the Russos were not aware of the chants, as they had not yet seen footage from Black Panther, and felt the moment was "incredibly cool".[34]
Paul Bettany as Vision: 
An android and Avenger created using the artificial intelligence J.A.R.V.I.S., Ultron, and the Mind Stone.[26] Anthony Russo called Vision "a living MacGuffin. Obviously, that raises the stakes because Vision's life is in danger, and his life is in conflict with Thanos' goals, so something's got to give".[25]
Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch: A member of Rogers's faction of Avengers who can harness magic and engage in hypnosis and telekinesis.[35]
Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon: 
A member of Rogers's faction of Avengers and former pararescueman trained by the military in aerial combat using a specially designed wing pack.[36] Mackie noted that Wilson has a grudge with other heroes like Iron Man and Black Panther after the events of Civil War.[25]
Sebastian Stan as James Buchanan "Bucky" Barnes / Winter Soldier:
An enhanced soldier and Rogers's ally and best friend who reemerged as a brainwashed assassin after being thought to have been killed in action during World War II.[37] Barnes, who formerly went by Winter Soldier, is given the name White Wolf by the people of Wakanda, who helped remove his Hydra programming.[21]
Tom Hiddleston as Loki: Thor's adopted brother, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name.[38]
Idris Elba as Heimdall: The all-seeing, all-hearing Asgardian and former sentry of the Bifröst Bridge, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name.[39]
Peter Dinklage as Eitri: King of the Dwarves of Nidavellir, and weaponsmith, based on the Norse mythological dwarf of the same name.[40]
Benedict Wong as Wong: A Master of the Mystic Arts, tasked with protecting some of Kamar-Taj's most valuable relics and books.[41]
Pom Klementieff as Mantis: A member of the Guardians of the Galaxy with empathic powers.[42]
Karen Gillan as Nebula: An adopted daughter of Thanos who was raised with Gamora as siblings.[43]
Dave Bautista as Drax the Destroyer: 
A member of the Guardians and warrior in search of vengeance against Thanos for killing his family.[44] At the end of each day of filming, Bautista would have to sit in a sauna to remove his makeup.[45]
Zoe Saldana as Gamora: A member of the Guardians who is an orphan from an alien world and was subsequently raised by Thanos, and is seeking redemption for her past crimes.[46] Ariana Greenblatt portrays a young Gamora.[47]
Vin Diesel as Groot: 
A member of the Guardians who is a tree-like humanoid.[48] Executive producer James Gunn explained that Groot is still an adolescent in the film, in the same state of growth seen in one of the post-credit scenes in Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017).[49] Terry Notary provided motion capture for Groot, and said the character is "coming of age, so you'll see the teenager find a mentor to look up to and to model himself after".[50]
Bradley Cooper as Rocket: 
A member of the Guardians who is a genetically-engineered raccoon-based bounty hunter, mercenary, and master of weapons and battle tactics.[51] Sean Gunn was again the stand-in for Rocket during filming, with his acting and expressions serving as motion reference for the character.[52][53]
Gwyneth Paltrow as Virginia "Pepper" Potts: 
Stark's fiancée and the CEO of Stark Industries.[54] Downey felt that "Pepper remains the heart of the [Iron Man] story", which was not a focal point in some of the preceding films with Stark. Downey continued that "we wanted to get back to that reality. Not just for them, but let's really see how that can add to the something-worth-fighting-for of it all".[10]
Benicio del Toro as Taneleer Tivan / The Collector: One of the Elders of the Universe who is an obsessive keeper of the largest collection of interstellar fauna, relics, and species of all manner in the galaxy.[55]
Josh Brolin as Thanos: 
An intergalactic warlord from Titan who seeks all six Infinity Stones to destroy half of all life[56][57][58] for the sake of "re-balanc[ing] the universe".[59] Producer Kevin Feige added that Thanos believes the universe is becoming over-populated, which led to the destruction of his home moon Titan and is something he vowed not to let happen again,[58] and also said "you could almost go so far as to say he is the main character of" the film.[60] McFeely shared this sentiment, describing the film as his "hero journey" in addition to being the film's protagonist, stating, "Part of that is the things that [mean] the most to him. We wanted to show that. It wasn't just power; it wasn't just an ideal; it was people".[27] Brolin likened Thanos to "the Quasimodo of this time" and the novel Perfume, since Thanos was born deformed and considered a "freak" on Titan,[61] while Joe Russo would reference The Godfather (1972) for Brolin at times, which Brolin felt helped "to emotionalize the whole thing".[62] Brolin further added that he preferred playing Thanos over Cable in Deadpool 2 (2018) because of the amount of work that went into creating the character.[63] Thanos does not wear armor for most of the film, which is symbolic of his growing power as he collects the Infinity Stones.[64] In addition to voicing for the character, Brolin performed motion capture on set.[65]
Chris Pratt as Peter Quill / Star-Lord: 
The half-human, half-Celestial leader of the Guardians who was abducted from Earth as a child and raised by a group of alien thieves and smugglers called the Ravagers.[35] Pratt described his role in the film as a "guest star" appearance and said "you get to be a little more vibrant; a little more irreverent; a little bit more colorful if you want it to be".[66]
Additionally, several other actors reprise their MCU roles: Danai Gurira as Okoye, the head of the Dora Milaje;[67] Letitia Wright as T'Challa's sister Shuri;[68] William Hurt as Thaddeus Ross, the U.S. Secretary of State;[69] Kerry Condon as the voice of Stark's A.I. F.R.I.D.A.Y.;[70] Winston Duke as M'Baku, the leader of Wakanda's mountain tribe the Jabari; Florence Kasumba as Ayo, a member of the Dora Milaje;[71] Jacob Batalon as Parker's friend Ned;[72] Isabella Amara as Parker's classmate Sally;[73] Tiffany Espensen as Parker's classmate Cindy;[74] and Ethan Dizon as Parker's classmate Tiny.[75] Samuel L. Jackson and Cobie Smulders make uncredited cameos as Nick Fury and Maria Hill, the former director and deputy director of S.H.I.E.L.D, respectively, in the film's post-credits scene.[76]

Thanos' henchmen, known collectively in the comics as the Black Order and in the film as the "Children of Thanos",[77] include Terry Notary as Cull Obsidian,[78][79] Tom Vaughan-Lawlor as Ebony Maw,[80][81] Carrie Coon as Proxima Midnight,[79] and Michael James Shaw as Corvus Glaive.[82] The foursome provided voices and motion-capture performances on set for their characters.[83][82] As Coon was pregnant during filming, she mainly did facial capture for Proxima Midnight with some motion-capture,[84] with stuntwoman Monique Ganderton standing-in and providing the rest on set.[85] Ebony Maw's look was inspired by the Marvel Comics character Mephisto, who appeared in the Infinity Gauntlet storyline.[86]

Ross Marquand voices Johann Schmidt / Red Skull, the "Stonekeeper" and former Nazi commander of Hydra during World War II.[40][87][88] Marquand replaces Hugo Weaving, who had expressed reluctance to reprise the character from Captain America: The First Avenger (2011).[40][87] Red Skull was created through CGI and portrayed with stand-ins on set.[88] Avengers co-creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance in the film as Parker's school bus driver,[40] while screenwriter Stephen McFeely cameos as Secretary Ross's aide.[89] Kenneth Branagh, the director of Thor (2011), voices an Asgardian distress caller in an uncredited cameo.[90] David Cross was invited to make a cameo appearance as Tobias Fünke, his character from the television sitcom Arrested Development, which the Russo brothers had previously worked on; this was prevented by a scheduling conflict, but Fünke still appears in the film as a specimen in the Collector's collection, played by an uncredited extra.[91] Executive producer Jon Favreau was to reprise his role as Happy Hogan, while co-director Joe Russo had a cameo appearance as a paparazzi photographer, but this scene did not make the theatrical cut of the film.[92]

Production
Further information: Production of Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame
In October 2014, Marvel announced a two-part sequel to Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015), titled Avengers: Infinity War. Part 1 was scheduled to be released on May 4, 2018, with Part 2 scheduled for May 3, 2019.[93][94] In April 2015, Marvel announced that Anthony and Joe Russo would direct both parts of Avengers: Infinity War,[95] with back-to-back filming expected to begin in 2016.[96] The next month, Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely had signed on to write the screenplays for both parts of the film,[97] which draws inspiration from Jim Starlin's 1991 The Infinity Gauntlet comic and Jonathan Hickman's 2013 Infinity comic.[98] Anthony Russo added the film was inspired by 1990s heist films, with Thanos "on a smash-and-grab [to acquire the Infinity Stones], and everybody's trying to catch up the whole movie".[58] Producer Kevin Feige said that the Infinity War films were subtitled Part 1 and Part 2 "because they [have] such shared elements, it felt appropriate... But I wouldn't call it one story that's cut in half. I would say it's going to be two distinct movies".[99] In May 2016, the Russos revealed that they would retitle the two films, to further remove the misconception that they were one large film split in two, with Joe stating, "The intention is we will change [the titles], we just haven't come up with [them] yet".[100] That July, Marvel revealed Part 1's title would be shortened to simply Avengers: Infinity War.[101]

Principal photography began on January 23, 2017,[102] under the working title Mary Lou,[103] at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County, Georgia,[104] with Trent Opaloch as director of photography.[105] Infinity War, along with Avengers: Endgame, were shot using IMAX/Arri 2D cameras, thus marking the first time that a Hollywood feature film was shot entirely with IMAX digital cameras.[106] In early February, Marvel confirmed the involvement of Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man, Chris Pratt as Peter Quill / Star-Lord, and Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the film.[9] Additional filming took place in Scotland beginning in February 2017. The filming occurred in Edinburgh, Glasgow and the Scottish Highlands,[107] with studio work taking place at Wardpark Studios in Cumbernauld.[108][109] In late June 2017, filming occurred in Downtown Atlanta,[110] as well as Atlanta's Central Park in early July,[111] before moving to Queens, New York in the middle of the month.[112] Filming concluded on July 14, 2017.[113] For the film's final scene, where Thanos settles in a nipa hut, the filmmakers worked with Thailand studio Indochina Productions to acquire footage of the Banaue Rice Terraces at Ifugao, Philippines.[114]

Later in July 2017, Joe Russo stated there were a couple of unfinished scenes for Infinity War that would be shot "in the next few months".[115] In early March 2018, Disney moved the release of Infinity War in the United States to April 27, 2018, to have it be released the same weekend as some of its international markets.[116][117] Visual effects for the film were created by Industrial Light & Magic,[118] Framestore,[119] Method Studios,[120] Weta Digital, DNEG, Cinesite, Digital Domain, Rise, Lola VFX, and Perception.[121] With an estimated budget in the range of $316–400 million,[2][3][4] it is one of the most expensive films ever made.[122] Evans and Hemsworth both earned $15 million for the film.[123]

Music
Main article: Avengers: Infinity War (soundtrack)
In June 2016, Alan Silvestri, who composed the score for The Avengers (2012), was revealed to be returning to score both Infinity War and Endgame.[124] Silvestri recorded his score from January 2018[125] to late March, and found working on the film to be "a really different experience than anything I'd done before, especially in regard to the approach and balancing quick shifts in tone".[126] Ludwig Göransson's theme from Black Panther is used in the film.[127] Hollywood Records and Marvel Music released regular and deluxe soundtrack albums digitally on April 27, 2018, with physical releases on May 18. The deluxe edition featured some extended and additional tracks.[128]

Marketing

From left to right: Kevin Feige, Chris Hemsworth, Tom Hiddleston, Chadwick Boseman and Mark Ruffalo at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con
In May 2017, Robert Downey Jr. and his philanthropic organization Random Act Funding partnered with Omaze for a contest in which a randomly chosen winner from those that donated would receive an Infinity War set visit.[129] A life-sized statue of Thanos, created by Legacy Effects, was on display at D23 Expo 2017,[130] alongside statues of the Black Order / "Children of Thanos": Corvus Glaive, Proxima Midnight, Ebony Maw, and Cull Obsidian.[77] Additionally, Feige, Joe Russo, Downey, Brolin, Bettany, Olsen, Klementieff, Gillan, Bautista, Cheadle, Mackie, Cumberbatch, Stan, Holland, Boseman, Ruffalo, and Hemsworth appeared at D23 Expo to present a clip highlighting the 10 years of MCU films, along with footage from Infinity War.[30] The footage, which was screened exclusively for the panel,[131] received strong audience reaction, with fans "literally on their feet and jumping as the footage played".[131][132] Julia Alexander of Polygon said there was "quite a bit happening" in the footage and it "finally feels like Marvel has made the movie it always wanted to—and the one we've always wanted to see."[132] CinemaBlend's Eric Eisenberg said the footage left him "literally shaking", with the film looking "like it could be one of the most epic blockbusters ever created".[133] Haleigh Foutch for Collider described it as "dark and dramatic, and utterly epic. It's clear Marvel is trying to do something different here... to pay off a decade's worth of narrative and world-building. While it's impossible to tell from two minutes work of footage, it certainly looks like that gamble paid off".[134] The D23 footage was also shown at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con International.[135] After the two convention presentations, Avengers: Infinity War generated over 90,000 new conversations on social media from July 17 to 23, the third-most during that time period behind Thor: Ragnarok and Justice League (2017), according to comScore and its PreAct service.[136] Infinity War stayed in third the
3035- following week, with over 41,000 new social media conversations, behind Ragnarok and It (2017).[137] By the week of October 16, Infinity War had generated over 679,000 total social media conversations.[138]

To promote the film's first trailer, Marvel released a compilation video of some of its previous trailers since Iron Man (2008), "paired with fan reaction videos to those trailers".[139] The first trailer for Avengers: Infinity War debuted on Good Morning America on November 29, 2017.[140] Josh Spiegel of The Hollywood Reporter said, "The most important part of the trailer is how it carefully, deliberately introduces the notion that the Infinity War films are going to function as a passing of the torch, from one set of Avengers to a newer group".[141] Scott Mendelson, writing for Forbes, noted that even though the trailer was not much different from the convention footage screened earlier in the year, it was "damn impressive. Moreover, it uses Nick Fury's big 'Avengers Initiative' speech, along with Alan Silvestri's Avengers theme, to excellent effect".[142] Conversely to Mendelson, Alexander commented on the different marketing strategy for the film between the convention footage scenes and the trailer scenes, feeling the "two couldn't be more different". She said the convention footage (intended to please the crowd who were "jittery with anticipation") was released between Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017) and Thor: Ragnarok, and heavily focused Thor and the Guardians, while the trailer (designed to explain the film to general audiences) heavily features Black Panther and Wakanda, which Alexander said could not have been done before the additional marketing for Black Panther that happened after the conventions provided additional context.[143] Gael Cooper of CNET observed that the trailer was viewed nearly 500,000 times in its first 15 minutes after it was posted on YouTube, but questioned if the trailer broke the site after the view counter appeared to be stuck at 467,331.[144] The trailer was viewed 230 million times in its first 24 hours, becoming the most viewed trailer in that time period, surpassing the record of It.[145]

In January 2018, Marvel Comics published a two-issue prequel comic titled Avengers: Infinity War Prelude, which serves as a bridge between Captain America: Civil War and Avengers: Infinity War.[146] A commercial for Infinity War aired during Super Bowl LII, and generated the most social media buzz of all the films advertised according to comScore and United Talent Agency; it was viewed 17.6 million times across YouTube and Facebook.[147] On February 27, Disney and Marvel announced the "Marvel: The Universe Unites" charity campaign leading to the release of merchandise for the film on March 3. The week-long event saw stars from the film create social media challenges to provide funds and raise awareness for charities that support children and families impacted by serious illness. Marvel planned to make a $250,000 donation to Starlight Children's Foundation if these posts collectively reached 1 million likes, while Disney planned to donate 10% of all Marvel's Disney Store sales in the United States and online on the weekend of March 3 to the Make-A-Wish Foundation, up to $50,000. Hasbro and Funko each donated $1 million worth of cash and products, to Give Kids the World Village and Starlight, respectively.[148]

A second trailer was released on March 16, which earned over 1 million views on YouTube in less than three hours after it was released.[149] Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post was not overly enthused about another superhero film having "special-effects-heavy villains, or the sight of yet another mysterious object hanging over the Manhattan skyline", but felt the trailer made her realize "that I'm actually looking forward to seeing [the characters of the MCU] get to know each other".[150] Spiegel agreed with Rosenberg about the potential for character interactions, but felt it was "gimmicky" to have so many "crossover-style introductions or combinations of heroes in a movie like this".[151] The second trailer was viewed 179 million times in the first 24 hours, the third-most viewed trailer in that time period, behind the first trailer for the film and It, while also becoming the biggest release for a second trailer, surpassing Beauty and the Beast (2017) (128 million views).[152] A week before the film's release, the Burj Khalifa in Dubai was lit up each night for the film, counting down to its release.[153] Marvel also featured tie-in events across seven of their mobile games to promote the film.[154] In early May, Marvel and Epic Games announced the "Infinity Gauntlet Limited Time Mashup" mode for Fortnite Battle Royale, where players could find the Infinity Gauntlet hidden on the game map and become Thanos with added abilities. The Russo brothers were fans of Fortnite and approached Donald Mustard, the worldwide creative director of Epic Games, about the potential for a crossover between the properties.[155] On November 20, Little, Brown and Company published Marvel's Avengers: Infinity War: Thanos – Titan Consumed, written by Barry Lyga. Despite not existing within Marvel Studios' MCU canon, the novel explores the origins of Thanos before the events of the film. Lyga spoke with Marvel Studios to get an "outline of who Thanos is and what he means to the movies", and "was given great latitude and a free hand [in some areas of the story], while in others I had to tip-toe very carefully through the MCU".[156]

All-in-all, the studio spent an estimated $150 million on prints and advertisements promoting the film.[157] Additional marketing partners for the film included Coca-Cola, Quicken Loans and their Rocket Mortgage service, the Infiniti QX50 (which is also featured in the film), Ziploc, Go-Gurt, Yoplait, Synchrony Bank, American Airlines, and Stand Up to Cancer. The partners created television commercials "inspired by or featuring the film's characters and themes", interactive digital initiatives, and robust in-store presences at numerous retailers. Duracell, Unilever, Quaker Oats Company, Chevron, and Samsung ran promotions in smaller markets. Coca-Cola, Ziploc, Go-Gurt, and Yoplait created special packaging in support of the film, with Synchrony implementing a "Save Like a Hero" campaign, and Stand Up to Cancer and American Airlines launching a national campaign with a PSA starring Johansson and Hemsworth. In the United Kingdom, OnePlus released an Infinity War edition for one of their smartphones. Deadline Hollywood estimated the media value was $150 million, the largest for any Marvel film, with Coca-Cola contributing an estimated $40 million.[158]

Release
Theatrical
Avengers: Infinity War held its world premiere at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles on April 23, 2018, screening also at the adjacent El Capitan Theatre and Grauman's Chinese Theatre.[159] It was released in most countries worldwide, including the United States, on April 27, 2018, with a few debuts beginning as early as April 25,[116] and was shown in IMAX and 3D on select screens.[160][161] In the United States, the film opened in 4,474 theaters, 408 of which were IMAX; this was the widest release for a Disney title ever and the second-widest ever after Despicable Me 3's 4,529 theaters. Three of AMC Theatres' locations screened the film for 24 hours straight, with 53 of their locations having showtimes at either 2 am or 3 am to accommodate demand.[162] In India, the film had the biggest release ever for a Hollywood film, opening on nearly 2,000 screens in four languages.[163] The film also screened in 515 4DX theaters in 59 countries.[164] Avengers: Infinity War was originally scheduled to be released on May 4, 2018 in the United States.[93][94] The Chinese release of the film, which opened on May 11, 2018,[165] was originally scheduled to end on June 10, 2018, but was granted a "rare" extension of 30 days, to end on July 9, 2018.[166] Avengers: Infinity War is part of Phase Three of the MCU.[167]

Select footage from the film was screened in various cities during the film's press tour in early April, ahead of the Los Angeles premiere. The Russos said only a limited amount of the film would be shown at these screenings to reduce the chance of spoilers being leaked. Adam Chitwood of Collider commented that this was "highly unusual as most Marvel movies are screened in their entirety for press about a month before they hit theaters".[168] Ahead of the United States release, AMC Theatres in New York City and Orlando, Florida aired an eleven-MCU film marathon beginning on April 25, ending in a screening of Infinity War. The El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles had a similar marathon for the film's release.[169]

Home media
Avengers: Infinity War was released on digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on July 31, 2018, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on August 14. The digital and Blu-ray releases include behind-the-scenes featurettes, audio commentary, deleted scenes, and a blooper reel. The digital release also features a roundtable discussion between MCU directors the Russos, Jon Favreau, Joss Whedon, James Gunn, Ryan Coogler, Peyton Reed, and Taika Waititi.[170] In terms of home media sales, the physical versions of the film were collectively the top home media release of the week in which they were first released.[171]

Despite being shot with IMAX cameras and released in IMAX theaters in the 1.90:1 aspect ratio, the home media release did not include the film in that aspect ratio, instead including a cropped 2.39:1 aspect ratio that was used for non-IMAX screenings.[172][173] Joe Russo said they "spent a long time trying to" have the IMAX version on the home media, but since the IMAX Corporation has "agency over that format", the situation was "complicated".[174] He did not rule out the possibility that this version could be available at a later point.[173]

Reception
Box office
Main article: List of box office records set by Avengers: Infinity War
Avengers: Infinity War grossed $678.8 million in the United States and Canada, and $1.370 billion in other territories, for a worldwide total of $2.048 billion.[5] It became the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time,[175][176] as well as the highest-grossing film of 2018,[177] the highest-grossing MCU film, and the highest-grossing superhero film.[178]

Its worldwide opening weekend of $640.5 million was the biggest of all time, beating The Fate of the Furious' (2017) $541.9 million.[162] It was later beat by its sequel, Avengers: Endgame, which grossed $1.481 billion in its opening weekend.[179] It was the fastest film to make $1 billion at the worldwide box office, doing so in 11 days to eclipse Star Wars: The Force Awakens' (2015) record of 12 days.[180] Also, in its second weekend, Infinity War passed $13.5 million from 4DX screens, which was the all-time record for the format.[164] On June 12, 2018, Avengers: Infinity War passed the $2 billion mark at the worldwide box office, becoming the fourth film to cross that milestone after Avatar (2009), Titanic (1997), and The Force Awakens.[176] Crossing the mark in 48 days, it was the second-fastest to that point, after Avatar's 47-day record.[181] With $140 million worldwide from IMAX,[182] the film is the third-largest worldwide in the format, behind Avatar and The Force Awakens,[175] and the largest for a Marvel film.[183] Deadline Hollywood estimated the net profit of the film to be $500 million, accounting for production budgets, P&A, talent participations and other costs, with box office grosses and ancillary revenues from home media, placing it first on their list of 2018's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[157]

Pre-sale ticket records
In December 2017, a survey from Fandango indicated that Infinity War was the most anticipated film of 2018.[184] Fandango later reported that Infinity War achieved the largest initial 24-hour ticket pre-sales for a superhero film, taking just 6 hours to surpass the previous 24-hour record set by Black Panther. Atom Tickets reported that Infinity War sold more tickets in its first pre-sales day than Black Panther sold in its first month.[185] Within 72 hours, the film generated the largest pre-sales for any superhero film at AMC Theatres, with its advance ticket sales being 257.6% ahead of Black Panther's, 751.5% ahead of Captain America: Civil War, and 1,106.5% ahead of Avengers: Age of Ultron during the same time frame.[186] Two weeks before its release, Fandango revealed that advance ticket sales for Infinity War were outpacing the last seven MCU films combined in the same timeframe, and had become the company's top April release. It was also on pace to become the top superhero film.[187] A week before the film released, The Wall Street Journal said the film had sold more than $50 million worth of advance tickets, behind only The Force Awakens and Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017),[188][162] with Fandango reporting that more than 2,500 showtimes had sold out. On Atom Tickets, Infinity War had the most pre-sale volume, selling 7% higher than The Last Jedi and 250% higher than Black Panther at the same point in their sales. Atom also reported that ticket sales for Infinity War were doubling daily the week of its release, the fastest rate of increase the service has seen for any MCU title.[162]

United States and Canada
Avengers: Infinity War earned $106.7 million on its opening day in the United States and Canada (including $39 million from Thursday night previews), for an opening weekend total of $258.2 million. The Thursday night preview earning was the best for an MCU film (beating Avengers: Age of Ultron's $27.6 million) and the fourth-best of all time, behind The Force Awakens ($57 million), The Last Jedi ($45 million) and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 (2011) ($43.5 million). Fandango reported that $14 million of the $39 million came from ticket pre-sales from the company. The opening day gross was the second-best ever, behind The Force Awakens' $119.1 million; its Saturday gross of $83 million was the best-ever Saturday gross, beating Jurassic World's (2015) $69.6 million; and its Sunday gross of $69.2 million was the best-ever, beating The Force Awakens' $60.5 million. The total weekend gross became the highest-grossing opening weekend, beating The Force Awakens' $248 million. IMAX contributed $22.5 million to the opening weekend gross, which was the best opening for a Marvel film in the format and the third-biggest opening, behind The Force Awakens ($30 million) and The Last Jedi ($24.7 million). AMC reported that the film had the highest Friday and Saturday box office gross for a single title in the company's history, while Fandango reported that approximately $84 million worth of tickets were sold through the service, approximately 30%, which was the largest share of the weekend box office for any film in the company's history.[162] Avengers: Infinity War earned an additional $25 million the Monday after its opening weekend, which was the highest-grossing Monday in April, beating Furious 7 (2015) ($14 million), and the second-best Monday gross for an MCU film, after Black Panther ($40.1 million).[189] The next day, it earned $23.5 million, which was the highest-grossing Tuesday for an MCU film, beating Black Panther ($20.8 million), and the highest-grossing Tuesday in May, beating The Avengers ($17.6 million). It also tied The Force Awakens for the fastest to reach $300 million at five days.[190]

The film remained number one in its second weekend, earning $115.5 million, which was the second-best second weekend ever after The Force Awakens ($149.2 million). Infinity War also surpassed $400 million in the weekend, doing so in nine days, becoming the second fastest film to reach that mark, again after The Force Awakens's eight days.[164] In its third weekend, Infinity War remained number one at the box office, and became the second-fastest film to surpass $500 million, doing so in 15 days (behind The Force Awakens's 10 days). The weekend also saw its total domestic IMAX gross become $48.1 million, which was the highest for any MCU film.[178] The film's fourth weekend saw it come in second, behind Deadpool 2,[191] and in its fifth it finished third behind Solo: A Star Wars Story and Deadpool 2.[192] By May 23, Infinity War surpassed $600 million, becoming the second-fastest film to do so in 26 days, after The Force Awakens (12 days).[193] It remained in the top ten through its ninth weekend.[194] In the United States and Canada, it went on to become the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time,[176] and the second-highest-grossing superhero film, behind Black Panther.[195]

Other territories
Outside the United States and Canada, the film earned $382.7 million from 52 markets, opening number one in all, and became the number two opening internationally, behind The Fate of the Furious ($444.2 million). IMAX contributed $18.5 million, which was the best opening outside of the US, Canada, and China, surpassing The Force Awakens ($17.5 million).[196] All-time opening weekend records were set in South Korea ($39.2 million), Mexico ($25.4 million), Brazil ($19.1 million), India (for a Western release, $18.6 million), the Philippines ($12.5 million), Thailand ($10 million), Indonesia ($9.6 million), Malaysia,[196] Hong Kong, Vietnam,[197] Central America, Peru, Chile, Ecuador, Venezuela, Bolivia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, and West Africa,[196] with many also setting opening day records.[198] France had the biggest superhero opening in the market with $17.7 million,[196] as did Denmark, Finland, Norway, Portugal, and Sweden.[197] The United Kingdom earned $8.9 million, which was the biggest MCU opening day and third-highest opening day for a Disney film;[197] it would go on to earn $41.4 million for the weekend, which was the third-highest of all time and the second-highest Disney opening.[196] Argentina had the second-highest opening day of all time, while Germany had the best superhero film opening day of all time,[197] ultimately earning $14.7 million, which was the best superhero opening ever.[196] Many other European countries and the Middle East also broke superhero film records.[197] Japan had the second-biggest opening for an MCU film with $9 million,[196] and Australia had the second-highest opening weekend ever, with $23.2 million.[196]

Avengers: Infinity War remained number one in its 54 markets in its second weekend.[165] The $4.9 million opening day in Russia was the biggest of all time. However, there was some controversy with the film's release in that country. Originally, the Russian government ordered it to be released on May 11, but after a scandal the government made concessions and agreed to let it premiere on May 3 with a condition that on May 9, during the Victory Day, only Russian films would be played in the cinema theatres.[199] Infinity War was also the first film in Russia to sell more than 1 million tickets in a single day,[200] and went on to gross $17.6 million in the market, a new opening weekend record. IMAX contributed $2.2 million in the market, which was also an opening weekend record.[165] In its third weekend, the film remained number one in a majority of its markets. Infinity War opened in China to $200 million (RMB 1.266 billion), which was the second-highest opening weekend in local currency behind The Fate of the Furious ($184 million and RMB 1.352 million). IMAX contributed $20.5 million, which was the third-largest opening in China.[183] Infinity War also broke China's pre-sale record of 400 million yuan ($63 million).[201] In India, Infinity War became the first Hollywood film to earn over ₹2 billion net ($29.7 million),[202] and also became the highest-grossing MCU film in the United Kingdom.[203] In its sixth weekend, the film became the highest-grossing MCU film in Japan with $33 million.[204]

The film became the highest-grossing release ever in Brazil, Indonesia, the Philippines, Central America, Bolivia, Venezuela, Latin America as a region, Mexico, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Malaysia, Singapore, India (for a Western release), Vietnam, Indonesia, Thailand (for a Western release), and Mongolia,[165][183][175][182] the second-highest in the Asia-Pacific region (for a Western release), Hong Kong, and South Korea (for a Western release),[182] and the third-highest in China (for a Western release).[182] It is also the highest-grossing superhero film in many European countries, including the United Kingdom.[182] As of June 17, 2018, the film's top markets are China ($373.4 million), the United Kingdom ($95.7 million), and South Korea ($92.8 million).[205] The film is the third-highest-grossing film of all time in territories outside the United States and Canada.[176]

Critical response

Josh Brolin's performance as Thanos was praised by many critics.[206]
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 85% with an average score of 7.62/10, based on 467 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Avengers: Infinity War ably juggles a dizzying array of MCU heroes in the fight against their gravest threat yet, and the result is a thrilling, emotionally resonant blockbuster that (mostly) realizes its gargantuan ambitions."[207] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 68 out of 100 based on 54 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[208]

Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter praised the writers' and directors' ability to balance the large cast of characters, saying they, "under the supervision of Marvel Films maestro Kevin Feige, acknowledge the traffic jam of egos and play it for laughs".[209] Owen Gleiberman of Variety concurred, stating, "Infinity War is a brashly entertaining jamboree, structured to show off each hero or heroine and give them just enough to do, and to update their mythologies without making it all feel like homework".[210] Rolling Stone's Peter Travers said the film is "too much of a good thing" and wrote, "The Russo brothers have clearly never learned the concept that less is more. They've used the premise of an Avengers reunion to put on a fireworks explosion of action and laughs that won't quit".[211] Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times called it Marvel's "biggest and most ambitious movie yet", but concluded "it's certainly not the best. However, there's plenty of action, humor and heart—and some genuinely effective dramatic moments". Roeper went on to praise the film's cast and Josh Brolin in particular, whom he called "the film's most interesting performance".[212] Gleiberman called Brolin's motion capture performance "supremely effective" and said, "Brolin infuses Thanos with his slit-eyed manipulative glower, so that the evil in this movie never feels less than personal".[210] McCarthy wrote, "Brolin's calm, considered reading of the character bestows this conquering beast with an unexpectedly resonant emotional dimension, making him much more than a thick stick figure of a supervillain".[209] Gleiberman also praised the film's action sequences, saying "Infinity War brims with tensely spectacular combat sequences, even if the question of who's going to win each one has that extravagantly arbitrary could-Mighty-Mouse-beat-up-Superman? quality".[210] McCarthy called the scale of the action "astonishing",[209] and Travers wrote, "Avengers: Infinity War leaves viewers up in the air, feeling exhilarated and cheated at the same time, aching for a closure that never comes".[211] Josh Spiegel, also of The Hollywood Reporter, said the film takes "a cue from the ending of The Empire Strikes Back in its super-sized finale; this is the equivalent of Han Solo frozen in the carbonite, on steroids".[213]

A. O. Scott of The New York Times criticized the film's reliance on other films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, saying, "Considered on its own, as a single, nearly 2-hour-40-minute movie, Avengers: Infinity War makes very little sense", but conceded that it "was never meant to be viewed or judged in isolation".[214] Richard Brody of The New Yorker agreed, stating, "The insubstantiality of the film isn't due to the infinite yet flimsy malleability of C.G.I. gimmickry but, instead, to the dispersion of its drama throughout the many cinematic installations set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe".[215] Stephanie Zacharek of Time said, "[It] isn't really a beginning, but more of a middle or an end with a new piece of yarn attached. You need to have seen and internalized every one of the previous 18 Marvel Cinematic Universe movies to fully get it".[216] Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times called it a "brisk, propulsive, occasionally rousing and borderline-gutsy continuation of a saga that finally and sensibly seems to be drawing to a close", but called its ultimate bid for catharsis "unsuccessful" since the Marvel "assembly line [is not stopped] from chugging ahead with its signature polished, mechanized efficiency".[217] Scott also criticized the action sequences, calling them "tedious and predictable" and "surely the most expensive parts of the movie, but the money seems less like an imaginative tool than a substitute for genuine imagination".[214] Likewise, Zacharek said, "There's no pacing in Avengers: Infinity War. It's all sensation and no pulse. Everything is big, all of the time".[216]

Audience response
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale,[162] while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 87% overall positive score and a 68% "definite recommend".[164] American YouTube personality Tony "Nem" Mitchell watched the film 103 times in theaters, a world record. When Mitchell's streak was gaining media awareness around his 44th viewing, he noted that IMAX reached out to give him 50 free tickets to continue the streak, and the Russo brothers invited him to Endgame's premiere.[218][219][220] Mitchell said this was the way he "want[ed] to support Marvel and the Russo brothers".[218] Seventeen-year-old Kieran Harvey from Staffordshire also watched the film in theaters 100 times. Harvey stated that he "didn't plan on seeing it this many times it just sort of happened" adding that Infinity War "just felt so different to anything I've ever seen before, and I just love it so much so have been going as much as I can!"[221]

The ending of the film sparked various Internet meme reactions,[222] including one referencing Spider-Man saying he does not feel good as he disintegrates, which was applied to other things.[223] The website, DidThanosKill.Me was created for fans to see if they would have been spared by Thanos or not.[224] The ending also spawned the creation of the Reddit subreddit, /r/thanosdidnothingwrong. A user within the subreddit suggested that half of the approximately 20,000 subscribers at the time be banned from the subreddit, in order to mimic the events of the film. After the community agreed to the measure, the moderators approached Reddit's administrators to see if the mass ban would even be possible. Once the administrators agreed to the random ban of half the subscribers, it was set to occur on July 9, 2018.[225] Notice of the impending ban made the subreddit's subscribers increase to over 700,000,[226] including both of the Russos who subscribed.[227] Ahead of the ban, Brolin posted a video saying "Here we go, Reddit users," and ending it with a snap.[228] Over 60,000 people watched a live Twitch stream of the ban occurring, which lasted several hours.[226] The ban of over 300,000 accounts, which included Anthony Russo, was the largest in Reddit's history.[226][229] Those banned then gathered in the new subreddit, /r/inthesoulstone.[225][226] One Reddit user who participated described the ban as embodying "the spirit of the Internet" with people "banding together, en masse, around something relatively meaningless but somehow decidedly awesome and hilarious".[229] Andrew Tigani of Screen Rant said this showed "how impactful the film has already become to pop culture. It is also a testament to how valuable fan interaction can be via social media".[228]

Accolades
Award	Date of ceremony	Category	Recipient(s)	Result	Ref(s)
Academy Awards	February 24, 2019	Best Visual Effects	Dan DeLeeuw, Russell Earl, Kelly Port, Dan Sudick	Nominated	[230]
Annie Awards	February 2, 2019	Outstanding Achievement for Character Animation in a Live Action Production	Paul Story, Sidney Kombo, Eteuati Tema, Jacob Luamanuvae, Sam Sharplin	Nominated	[231]
Austin Film Critics Association	January 7, 2019	Best Ensemble	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[232]
Best Motion Capture/Special Effects Performance	Josh Brolin	Won
British Academy Film Awards	February 10, 2019	Best Special Visual Effects	Dan DeLeeuw, Russell Earl, Kelly Port, Dan Sudick	Nominated	[233]
Costume Designers Guild Awards	February 19, 2019	Excellence in Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film	Judianna Makovsky	Nominated	[234]
Critics' Choice Movie Awards	January 13, 2019	Best Action Movie	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[235]
Best Visual Effects	Nominated
Florida Film Critics Circle	December 21, 2018	Best Visual Effects	Dan DeLeeuw, Russell Earl, Kelly Port, Dan Sudick	Nominated	[236]
Georgia Film Critics Association	January 12, 2019	Oglethorpe Award for Excellence in Georgia Cinema	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[237]
Golden Trailer Awards	May 29, 2019	Best Home Ent Action	"Announce Trailer" (Tiny Hero)	Nominated	[238]
Best Home Ent Fantasy Adventure	Won
Best Fantasy Adventure Poster	"Payoff One-Sheet" (LA/Lindeman Associates)	Nominated
Grammy Awards	February 10, 2019	Best Instrumental Composition	Alan Silvestri for "Infinity War"	Nominated	[239]
Hollywood Film Awards	November 4, 2018	Hollywood Visual Effects Award	Dan Deleeuw, Kelly Port, Russel Earl, and Dan Sudick	Honoree	[240]
Hugo Awards	August 18, 2019	Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form	Russo brothers and Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely	Nominated	[241]
Los Angeles Online Film Critics Society	January 9, 2019	Best Action Film	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[242]
[243]
Best Blockbuster	Nominated
Best Visual Effects	Dan DeLeeuw, Russell Earl, Kelly Port, Dan Sudick	Won
Best Stunt Work	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated
Best Visual Effects or Animated Performance	Josh Brolin	Won
MPSE Golden Reel Awards	February 17, 2019	Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing - Sound Effects and Foley for Feature Film	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[244]
MTV Movie & TV Awards	June 18, 2018	Best Movie	Nominated	[245]
Best Villain	Josh Brolin	Nominated
Best Fight	Scarlett Johansson, Danai Gurira, Elizabeth Olsen vs. Carrie Coon	Nominated
Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards	March 23, 2019	Favorite Movie	Avengers: Infinity War	Won	[246]
Favorite Movie Actor	Chris Evans	Nominated
Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Favorite Movie Actress	Scarlett Johansson	Nominated
Zoe Saldana	Nominated
Favorite Superhero	Robert Downey Jr.	Won
Chris Evans	Nominated
Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Scarlett Johansson	Nominated
Favorite Butt-Kicker	Zoe Saldana	Nominated
People's Choice Awards	November 11, 2018	Movie of 2018	Avengers: Infinity War	Won	[247]
Action Movie of 2018	Won
Male Movie Star of 2018	Robert Downey Jr.	Nominated
Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Female Movie Star of 2018	Scarlett Johansson	Won
Action Movie Star of 2018	Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Satellite Awards	February 17, 2019	Best Visual Effects	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[248]
Saturn Awards	September 13, 2019	Best Comic-to-Film Motion Picture	Nominated	[249]
Best Supporting Actor	Josh Brolin	Won
Screen Actors Guild Awards	January 27, 2019	Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Motion Picture	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[250]
Seattle Film Critics Society	December 17, 2018	Best Visual Effects	Dan DeLeeuw, Russell Earl, Kelly Port, Dan Sudick	Nominated	[251]
[252]
Best Villain	Josh Brolin	Nominated
St. Louis Film Critics Association	December 16, 2018	Best Action Film	Avengers: Infinity War	Nominated	[253]
Best Visual/Special Effects	Dan DeLeeuw, Russell Earl, Kelly Port, Dan Sudick	Won
Special Merit (for best scene, cinematic technique or other memorable aspect or moment)	Thor arrives in Wakanda	Nominated
Teen Choice Awards	August 12, 2018	Choice Action Movie	Avengers: Infinity War	Won	[254]
Choice Action Movie Actor	Chris Evans	Nominated
Robert Downey Jr.	Won
Tom Holland	Nominated
Choice Action Movie Actress	Elizabeth Olsen	Nominated
Scarlett Johansson	Won
Zoe Saldana	Nominated
Choice Movie Villain	Josh Brolin	Nominated
Choice Liplock	Chris Pratt and Zoe Saldana	Nominated
Choice Hissy Fit	Mark Ruffalo	Nominated
Visual Effects Society	February 5, 2019	Outstanding Visual Effects in a Photoreal Feature	Daniel DeLeeuw, Jen Underdahl, Kelly Port, Matt Aitken and Dan Sudick	Won	[255]
Outstanding Animated Character in a Photoreal Feature	Jan Philip Cramer, Darren Hendler, Paul Story, Sidney Kombo-Kintombo for "Thanos"	Won
Outstanding Model in a Photoreal or Animated Project	Chad Roen, Ryan Rogers, Jeff Tetzlaff and Ming Pan for "Nidavellir Forge Megastructure"	Nominated
Outstanding Effects Simulations in a Photoreal Feature	Gerardo Aguilera, Ashraf Ghoniem, Vasilis Pazionis and Hartwell Durfor for "Titan"	Won
Florian Witzel, Adam Lee, Miguel Perez Senent, Francisco Rodriguez for "Wakanda"	Nominated
Outstanding Compositing in a Photoreal Feature	Sabine Laimer, Tim Walker, Tobias Wiesner and Massimo Pasquetti for "Titan"	Won
Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association	December 3, 2018	Best Motion Capture Performance	Josh Brolin	Won	[256]
Sequel
Main article: Avengers: Endgame
Further information: List of Marvel Cinematic Universe films
Avengers: Endgame was released on April 26, 2019,[257] with the Russos returning to direct,[95] and Markus and McFeely once again writing the screenplay.[97]

See also
List of films featuring powered exoskeletons
List of most-viewed online videos in the first 24 hours
Notes
 The destruction of Asgard is depicted in the 2017 film Thor: Ragnarok.
 Identified off-screen as a message to Carol Danvers / Captain Marvel.[6]
References
 "Avengers: Infinity War". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on April 19, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 8, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Marches Toward $600M Profit; How The Russo Brothers Mapped Out The Marvel Hit". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 10, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Sylt, Christian (April 27, 2018). "Disney Reveals Financial Muscle Of 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 Rubin, Rebecca (April 30, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Officially Lands Biggest Box Office Opening of All Time". Variety. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
 "Avengers: Infinity War (2018)". Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019.
 Hornshaw, Phil; Owen, Phil; Lincoln, Ross A. (April 26, 2018). "How Will 'Captain Marvel' Play into That Wild 'Avengers: Infinity War' Ending?". TheWrap.com. Archived from the original on April 27, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2018.
 "Robert Downey Jr. To Return As Marvel's Iron Man". Marvel.com. June 20, 2013. Archived from the original on June 20, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 Kit, Borys (April 21, 2016). "Robert Downey Jr. Joins 'Spider-Man: Homecoming'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016.
 Couch, Aaron (February 10, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Featurette Shows Off First Footage From Set". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 8, 2018). "Behold Iron Man's new armor in Avengers: Infinity War – Robert Downey Jr. says he'll need it". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
 Chitwood, Adam (April 14, 2015). "Chris Hemsworth Reveals the 3 Marvel Movies Left on His Contract". Collider. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
 Davis, Brandon (April 10, 2016). "Russo Brothers Confirm Star-Lord And Thor in Avengers: Infinity War". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2016.
 Couch, Aaron (April 27, 2018). "'Avengers' Writers Tweaked 'Infinity War' for James Gunn". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Watercutter, Angela (August 14, 2018). "Everything You Need to Know About the Avengers: Infinity War Heroes". Wired. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2018.
 Sciretta, Peter (October 28, 2014). "Watch: All Of Your Marvel Phase 3 Questions Answered By Marvel Head Kevin Feige". /Film. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
 Butler, Tom (January 25, 2016). "Mark Ruffalo Promises Epic Arc For Hulk Across Thor 3 and Infinity War". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2016.
 Keene, Allison (March 13, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War': Chadwick Boseman and Mark Ruffalo on The Avengers Coming to Wakanda". Collider. Archived from the original on March 13, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2018.
 Schwerdtfeger, Connor (May 7, 2018). "The Real Reason Why Hulk Won't Fight in Avengers: Infinity War, According To The Russo Brothers". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2018.
 Eisenberg, Eric (October 10, 2017). "Apparently Mark Ruffalo And Kevin Feige Have Planned A Special Trilogy for the Hulk". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on October 11, 2017. Retrieved October 10, 2017.
 "TNF Preview, WR/CB Matchups, DFS Outlook". ESPN Fantasy Focus Football (Podcast). ESPN. October 12, 2017. Event occurs at 1:19:40. Archived from the original on March 29, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. via Gerber, Sean (January 15, 2018). "Joe Russo: Steve Rogers isn't Nomad in 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Marvel Studios News. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 8, 2018). "Behind the scenes of Avengers: Infinity War as new heroes unite – and others will end". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
 Libbey, Dirk (August 1, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War Almost Kept Captain America Off Screen Until The Final Minutes". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018.
 "Halle Berry, Jamie Dornan, Chris Evans, Gael García Bernal, Samuel L. Jackson, Scarlett Johansson, Dakota Johnson, Kate Mckinnon, Shirley Maclaine, Hailee Steinfeld Will Be Presenters on Oscars® Stage". Academy Awards. February 7, 2017. Archived from the original on February 8, 2017. Retrieved February 7, 2017.
 Welch, Alex (June 7, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War – Black Panther Actor Starts Filming". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 8, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 8, 2018). "Behind the scenes of Avengers: Infinity War as new heroes unite – and others will end – page 3". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
 Simpson, George (September 26, 2016). "Benedict Cumberbatch's Doctor Strange CONFIRMED for Avengers: Infinity War". Daily Express. Archived from the original on September 26, 2016. Retrieved September 26, 2016.
 Couch, Aaron (April 30, 2018). "How 'Avengers: Infinity War' Writers Crafted Its Ambitious Ending". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Johnson, Richard (January 12, 2017). "This Cumberbatch body-double is basically a Cumber-twin". Page Six (New York Daily News). Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
 Sobon, Nicole (June 15, 2017). "Benedict Cumberbatch Arrives on Avengers: Infinity War Set". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 17, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2017.
 Alexander, Julia (July 15, 2017). "Avengers, Guardians of the Galaxy assemble at D23 to celebrate Marvel, tease Infinity War". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017.
 Sciretta, Peter. "Don Cheadle Talks 'Avengers: Infinity War' and Rhodey's Reluctance to Suit Up as War Machine (Set Visit Interview)". /Film. Archived from the original on April 10, 2018. Retrieved April 9, 2018.
 Parker, Ryan (August 1, 2018). "Robert Downey Jr. Coached Tom Holland Through That Heartbreaking 'Infinity War' Scene". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018.
 Donn, Emily (June 9, 2017). "Black Panther Director Explains T'Challa's Powers". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 10, 2017. Retrieved June 10, 2017.
 Parker, Ryan (August 1, 2018). "'Black Panther' Actors Surprised Russo Brothers With Unscripted Chants in 'Infinity War'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 13, 2018. Retrieved September 13, 2018.
 Lincoln, Ross A. (July 29, 2016). "Marvel's 'Avengers 3' Gets Official Title With Temp Name Hung On 'Avengers 4'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved July 30, 2016.
 Palmer, Frank (March 20, 2017). "Exclusive: Anthony Mackie Says FALCON Won't Die". Screen Geek. Archived from the original on March 22, 2017. Retrieved March 21, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (August 9, 2016). "'Captain America' Actor Sebastian Stan to Star in Thriller 'We Have Always Lived in the Castle' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 10, 2016.
 Babbage, Rachel (November 1, 2014). "Loki to appear in Thor: Ragnarok and both parts of Avengers: Infinity War". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 1, 2014. Retrieved November 2, 2014.
 Lussier, Germain (March 16, 2018). "Peter Dinklage Is Definitely in Avengers: Infinity War, But Who's He Playing?". io9. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 Robinson, Joana (April 27, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War – A Guide to all the Cameos and Surprising Bit Parts". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018.
 Mueller, Matthew (October 21, 2016). "Benedict Wong Confirmed For Avengers Infinity War". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2016.
 Romano, Nick (January 28, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War adds Mantis from Guardians of the Galaxy 2". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
 McLean, Pauline (January 17, 2017). "Karen Gillan on Tupperware Party, Inverness and Avengers". BBC News. Archived from the original on January 17, 2017. Retrieved January 17, 2017.
 Bautista, Dave [@DaveBautista] (January 22, 2017). "Welp!!! That makes 3 of us! And I start filming tomorrow! 😱 #MarvelShroudofSecrecy 😖" (Tweet). Archived from the original on January 23, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2017 – via Twitter.
 Schwerdtfeger, Conner (April 30, 2018). "Getting Drax's Makeup Off Is A Huge Chore, According To Tom Holland". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Leadbeater, Alex (January 9, 2017). "Gamora Confirmed for Avengers: Infinity War". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 10, 2017. Retrieved January 9, 2017.
 Abrams, Simon (April 30, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Faces a Crisis of Imagination". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Welch, Alex (January 20, 2016). "Vin Diesel: Groot & Hulk Must 'Get Down' in Avengers: Infinity War". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 21, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2016.
 Hall, Gerrad (July 23, 2017). "James Gunn explains Groot's age difference in Guardians 2 vs. Infinity War footage". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved July 24, 2017.
 Alter, Ethan (October 25, 2017). "Terry Notary on going ape in 'The Square' and playing teen Groot in 'Avengers'; plus, an exclusive clip". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Buchanan, Kyle (July 15, 2017). "What Happened in Today's Secret Trailer for Avengers: Infinity War?". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017.
 Lesnick, Sean (January 24, 2017). "Sean Gunn Shares from the Avengers: Infinity War Set". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on January 25, 2017. Retrieved January 24, 2017.
 Gunn, James [@jamesgunn] (February 11, 2017). "He's not a stand-in. He's motion reference. We use Sean's acting and expressions for Rocket. And yes he's doing that" (Tweet). Archived from the original on February 12, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2017 – via Twitter.
 Ridgely, Charlie (January 26, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War': Gwyneth Paltrow Lets Some Pepper Potts Spoilers Slip". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2018. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Sciretta, Peter (February 7, 2017). "The Collector Confirmed For 'Avengers: Infinity War'". /Film. Archived from the original on February 8, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2017.
 Keyes, Rob (October 28, 2014). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Announced For 2018–19 in Two Parts". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved November 2, 2014.
 Peters, Megan (May 19, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Synopsis Released". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 8, 2018). "Behind the scenes of Avengers: Infinity War as new heroes unite – and others will end – page 2". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
 Welch, Alex (February 14, 2017). "Infinity War: Thanos Wants To 'Rebalance The Universe'". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 14, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2017.
 Goldberg, Matt (February 6, 2017). "Thanos Is the 'Main Character' in 'Avengers: Infinity War' Says Kevin Feige". Collider. Archived from the original on February 6, 2017. Retrieved February 7, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 9, 2018). "Josh Brolin says there is heart within the murderous Thanos of Avengers: Infinity War". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 12, 2018. Retrieved March 12, 2018.
 Chitwood, Adam (October 19, 2017). "Josh Brolin on Playing Thanos and Referencing 'The Godfather' in 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Collider. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2017.
 Medina, Joseph Jammer (April 18, 2018). "Thanos Or Cable: Which Does Josh Brolin Prefer Playing?". Latino Review Media. Archived from the original on April 19, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018.
 Schwartz, Terri (July 23, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Director Explains Thanos' More 'Casual,' 'Spiritual' Costume". IGN. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 Busch, Jenna (February 1, 2016). "Josh Brolin on Playing Thanos in the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Superhero Hype!. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016.
 Daniell, Mark (March 15, 2018). "'It's going to be messy': 'Avengers: Infinity War' stars promise crying in the theatre". Toronto Sun. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 Fleming Jr., Mike (June 13, 2017). "'The Walking Dead's Danai Gurira Starring In 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
 Sobon, Nicole (August 27, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Adds Another Black Panther Character". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 27, 2017.
 Fullerton, Huw (April 30, 2018). "The biggest cameos and surprise appearances in Avengers: Infinity War". Radio Times. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Beresford, Jack (April 24, 2018). "8 incredible Irish connections to Avengers: Infinity War". The Irish Post. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018.
 Pritchard, Tom (November 29, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Breakdown: Everything We Spotted in the First Trailer". Gizmodo UK. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Francisco, Eric (October 9, 2017). "'Spider-Man: Homecoming' Star Wants Ned to Become a Villain". Inverse. Archived from the original on October 10, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017.
 Morales, Wilson (March 19, 2017). "Isabella Amara Talks About Her Casting in Spider-Man: Homecoming & Confirms Avengers: Infinity War Appearance". Black Film. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved July 7, 2017.
 "Liberty University Graduate Earns Credit on Marvel's Latest 'Avengers' Film". Markets Insider. April 27, 2018. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018.
 Dizon, Ethan [@Ethan_Dizon] (November 29, 2017). "It has begun... So happy to be a part of #AvengersInfinityWar as @SpiderManMovie's friend, Tiny. Watch the new trailer today! Thank you @MarvelStudios for the incredible opportunity. #chess #SpiderManHomecoming #MarvelStudios" (Tweet). Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018 – via Twitter.
 Robinson, Joanna (April 26, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War: That End Credits Scene, Explained". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018.
 Thompson, Luke Y. (July 15, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War's Children of Thanos (Black Order) Were Just Unveiled at D23". Nerdist Industries. Archived from the original on April 19, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2018.
 Shanley, Patrick (March 10, 2017). "'Skull Island': Kong Motion-Capture Actor on Sequel Plans and Seeking Andy Serkis' Blessing". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 10, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017.
 Fullerton, Huwav (April 16, 2018). "Fargo's Carrie Coon to play crucial Avengers: Infinity War villain". Radio Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2018. Retrieved April 16, 2018.
 Arnold, Berry (August 21, 2017). "Tom Vaughan-Lawlor confirms role in Avengers: Infinity War". DublinLive. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved August 21, 2017.
 Pante, Corey (March 2, 2018). "This 'Infinity War' Villain Is So Much More Than Thanos' Henchman". Inverse. Archived from the original on March 6, 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2018.
 Esienberg, Eric (April 22, 2018). "We Know Who Is Playing Corvus Glaive in Avengers: Infinity War". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on April 22, 2018. Retrieved April 22, 2018.
 Mitchell, Robert (April 16, 2018). "Carrie Coon Joins 'Avengers: Infinity War' as Villain". Variety. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018. Retrieved April 16, 2018.
 Li, Shirley (May 14, 2018). "Carrie Coon didn't know Avengers: Infinity War would have so much to do with The Leftovers". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
 Burgos, Danielle (April 27, 2018). "Thanos' Female Villain In 'Infinity War' Has A Complex History – And An Emmy-Nominated Actor in Her Shoes". Bustle. Archived from the original on April 30, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
 Dumaraog, Ana (August 2, 2018). "Infinity War Director Says Ebony Maw Was Inspired By Mephisto". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 28, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War spoiler talk: Let's explore the surprise keeper of the Soul Stone". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018.
 Schedeen, Jesse; Vejvoda, Jim (December 21, 2018). "How Avengers: Infinity War Recreated Red Skull Without Hugo Weaving". IGN. Archived from the original on December 22, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2018.
 Davis, Brandon (April 29, 2018). "The Hidden 'Avengers: Infinity War' Cameo You Missed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 30, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
 Deen, Sarah (May 1, 2018). "Thor director Kenneth Branagh had a secret cameo in Avengers: Infinity War". Metro. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved June 23, 2018.
 Parker, Ryan (April 30, 2018). "The Russo Brothers Tried to Get David Cross for That 'Avengers: Infinity War' Easter Egg". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Ross, Dalton (August 2, 2018). "The Russo brothers explain cutting Jon Favreau out of Avengers: Infinity War". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018.
 Siegel, Lucas (October 28, 2014). "Marvel Announces Black Panther, Captain Marvel, Inhumans, Avengers: Infinity War Films, Cap & Thor 3 Subtitles". Newsarama. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Strom, Marc (October 28, 2014). "Marvel's The Avengers Head into an Infinity War". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Strom, Marc (April 7, 2015). "Joe & Anthony Russo to Direct 2-Part Marvel's 'Avengers: Infinity War' Event". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015.
 Kit, Borys; Siegemund-Broka, Austin (March 23, 2015). "Russo Brothers to Direct 'Avengers: Infinity War' Parts 1 and 2". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 23, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015.
 Strom, Mark (May 7, 2015). "Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely to Write Marvel's 2-Part 'Avengers: Infinity War' Event". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Outlaw, Kofi (March 16, 2018). "Russo Brothers Reveal Marvel Comic Influences on 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2018.
 Zalben, Alex; Horowitz, Josh (April 12, 2015). "Marvel's Movie Future: Here's Everything You Need To Know Through… Phase 4?". MTV. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015.
 Ryan, Mike (May 4, 2016). "Russo Brothers Confirm: 'Avengers: Infinity War 1 And 2' Will Be Retitled". Uproxx. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016.
 Donnelly, Matt (July 29, 2016). "Marvel Surprise: 'Avengers: Infinity War' Won't Be Split Into 2 Movies". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
 Schmidt, Joseph (January 22, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War And Sequel Set To Begin Filming Monday". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2017.
 Lovett, Jamie (October 26, 2016). "Avengers: Infinity War Working Title Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2016. Retrieved October 28, 2016.
 Lesnick, Silas (October 11, 2016). "Doctor Strange IMAX Preview Teases a Marvel Cinematic Multiverse". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on October 11, 2016. Retrieved October 11, 2016.
 Cabin, Chris (January 14, 2016). "'Captain America: Civil War' Directors on Landing Spider-Man, 'Infinity War' Shooting Schedule". Collider. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2016.
 Vlessing, Etan (May 7, 2015). "Marvel's 'Avengers: Infinity War' to be Shot Entirely With Imax/Arri 2D Camera". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 7, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Donohoe, Graeme (January 8, 2017). "New £400m Marvel blockbuster Avengers: Infinity War to be shot in Glasgow and Edinburgh". Daily Record. Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved January 8, 2017.
 Beers, Roy (February 26, 2017). "Marvel-lous new film hit for Cumbernauld". Cumbernauld News. Archived from the original on March 27, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2017.
 Love, Nicola (March 25, 2017). "Avengers in Edinburgh: Why Scotland isn't just filming location for Marvel blockbuster – it's a plot point". Daily Record. Archived from the original on March 27, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2017.
 Marston, George (June 26, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Returns to NYC … Sort Of". Newsarama. Archived from the original on June 27, 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2017.
 Murphy, Charles (July 9, 2017). "More 'Avengers: Infinity War' Set Pics Show Doctor Strange and Scott Lang Coming Together". MCU Exchange. Archived from the original on July 10, 2017. Retrieved July 10, 2017 – via Just Jared.
 Dumaraog, Ana (July 9, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Is Filming In Queens Next Week". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017.
 Romano, Nick (July 14, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War has wrapped filming". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 14, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017.
 "Yes, that 'Avengers: Infinity War' Scene is in PH". ABS-CBN Corporation News. April 26, 2018. Archived from the original on April 26, 2018. Retrieved April 26, 2018.
 ColliderVideos (July 24, 2017). Avengers: Infinity War Will Be the Longest MCU Movie Yet, Says Director Joe Russo. YouTube. Event occurs at 0:28. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved July 24, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 1, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War release date moves up a week". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 1, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2018.
 McClintock, Pamela (March 1, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Release Date Moves Up One Week to April". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 1, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2018.
 Lynch, Russel (May 26, 2017). "Star Wars special effects firm Industrial Light & Magic expands with move to Holborn". London Evening Standard. Archived from the original on November 23, 2017. Retrieved November 23, 2017.
 Frei, Vincent (July 25, 2017). "Spider-Man – Homecoming: Dominik Zimmerle – VFX Supervisor – Trixter". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved July 29, 2017.
 Caranicas, Peter (February 6, 2018). "'Black Panther' and 'Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle' Visual Effects Houses Method and Iloura Join Forces". Variety. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. Retrieved February 7, 2018.
 Frei, Vincent (March 16, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on March 24, 2018. Retrieved March 24, 2018.
 "Avengers: Infinity War is the second most expensive film ever made". The Daily Telegraph. April 20, 2018. Archived from the original on April 22, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018.
 Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (October 11, 2018). "Scarlett Johansson Lands $15 Million Payday for Black Widow Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
 Burlingame, Russ (June 6, 2016). "Avengers Composer Alan Silvestri To Return For Infinity War". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2016.
 Burlingame, Jon (May 11, 2017). "Alan Silvestri Receives Icon Honor at BMI Film, TV and Visual Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on May 14, 2017. Retrieved May 13, 2017.
 Burton, Byron (April 2, 2018). "'Ready Player One' Composer Alan Silvestri on Its Touching Final Moments". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
 Burton, Byron (April 27, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Composer Had Tough Time With One Scene in Particular". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018.
 "'Avengers: Infinity War' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. April 26, 2018. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018.
 Arrant, Chris (May 2, 2017). "RDJ Offers Avengers: Infinity War Set Visit". Newsarama. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017.
 Melrose, Kevin (July 14, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War's Thanos Fully Revealed in D23 Expo Photo". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 14, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017.
 Couch, Aaron (July 15, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' – Blockbuster First Trailer Brings D23 to Its Feet". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017.
 Alexander, Julia (July 15, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War's first trailer proves the Marvel we've dreamt of for a decade is real". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017.
 Eisenberg, Eric (July 15, 2017). "The Avengers: Infinity War Debuts Footage At D23, And We Are Still Shaking". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017.
 Foutch, Haleigh (July 15, 2017). "We Saw the First 'Avengers: Infinity War' Footage and It Is Nuts". Collider. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017.
 Burton, Bonnie (July 22, 2017). "Comic-Con 2017: 'Black Panther,' 'Infinity War' blew us away at the Marvel panel". CNET. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (July 24, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Leads Social Media Buzz Thanks to Comic-Con". Variety. Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Retrieved July 25, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (July 31, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Tops Social Media Buzz for Second Consecutive Week". Variety. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved July 31, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (October 23, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Creates Thunderous Buzz on Social Media Ahead of Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 Couch, Aaron (November 28, 2017). "Marvel Teases 'Avengers: Infinity War' Trailer With 10-Year Retrospective". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Rubin, Rebecca (November 29, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Explosive First Trailer Arrives". Variety. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Spiegel, Josh (November 29, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Begins a Sad Goodbye for Marvel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Mendelson, Scott (November 29, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Trailer Teases An Epic MCU Finale". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Alexander, Julia (November 29, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War trailer is different from earlier SDCC footage – and much better". Polygon. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Cooper, Gael Fashingbauer (November 29, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' trailer explodes with action". CNET. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Couch, Aaron (November 30, 2017). "Captain America's 'Infinity War' Beard Was Most Popular Part of Trailer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Hood, Cooper (October 17, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Prelude Comic Reveals Updated Logo". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 22, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2017.
 McClintock, Pamela (February 5, 2018). "Super Bowl Movie Ads: 'Avengers: Infinity War' Big Winner". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 6, 2018. Retrieved February 5, 2018.
 Markus, Tucker Chet (February 27, 2018). "Marvel Universe Unites For Children's Charities". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved February 27, 2018.
 Pallotta, Frank (March 16, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' trailer assembles Marvel's mightiest heroes". CNN. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 Rosenberg, Alyssa (March 16, 2018). "The 'Avengers: Infinity War' trailer reminds me why I like Marvel movies". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 17, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 Spiegel, Josh (March 16, 2018). "The Most Exciting Promise of 'Avengers: Infinity War'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 17, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 McClintock, Pamela (March 20, 2018). "New 'Avengers: Infinity War' Trailer Nabs Third-Biggest Debut Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018.
 "Dubai's Burj Khalifa starts countdown for 'Avengers: Infinity War' release". Khaleej Times. April 22, 2018. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018.
 Dinh, Christine (April 18, 2018). "This Week in Marvel Games: Thanos Descends Upon Marvel Games With 'Avengers: Infinity War' Event". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on May 17, 2018. Retrieved May 17, 2018.
 Romano, Nick (May 7, 2018). "Thanos is coming to Fortnite for epic Avengers: Infinity War crossover". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 Lussier, Germain (April 16, 2018). "Thanos Is Getting a Book [Corrected]". io9. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018. Retrieved April 16, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 8, 2019). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Is King Of Marvel Universe (For Now) – No. 1 In 2018 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 6, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Will Be Marvel's Biggest Promo Campaign Yet". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 9, 2018. Retrieved April 8, 2018.
 Couch, Aaron; Parker, Ryan (April 24, 2018). "Robert Downey Jr. Celebrates Lack of Egos at 'Avengers: Infinity War' Premiere". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018.
 Lieberman, David (February 22, 2017). "Disney Films To Show on Imax Through 2019 With New Distribution Deal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017.
 Kroll, Justin (September 12, 2017). "'Star Wars: Episode IX' Release Date Moves to December 2019". Variety. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 30, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' All-Time Opening Record Even Higher With $258M+ Domestic, $640M+ WW – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Pillai, Sreedhar (April 22, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War expected to release in 2000 screens in India, unprecedented for any Hollywood film". Firstpost. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 7, 2018). "'Infinity War' Is Second-Fastest Pic To $400M With Second-Best 2nd Weekend Ever, Now Back At $115M+ – Monday". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 6, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Surges To $1.164B Global & #5 Superhero Movie Ever WW; $713M Overseas – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (June 6, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Secures Rare China Release Extension As It Nears $2B WW". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 7, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2018.
 Trumbore, Dave (May 1, 2018). "MCU Timeline Explained: From Infinity Stones to Infinity War and Beyond". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
 Chitwood, Adam (April 3, 2018). "Russo Brothers Ask Fans Not to Spoil 'Infinity War'; Say the True Plot Is a Secret". Collider. Archived from the original on April 3, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2018.
 Shanley, Patrick (March 16, 2018). "AMC Theaters Will Host 12-Film Marvel Marathon Ahead of 'Infinity War'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 17, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 Perry, Spencer (July 10, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War Blu-ray, 4K, and Digital-HD Details Confirmed!". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on July 10, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2018.
 "Top 20 Sellers for Week Ended 08-18-18". Media Play News. August 18, 2018. Archived from the original on September 8, 2018. Retrieved September 8, 2018.
 Archer, John (July 13, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' 4K Blu-ray Set To Frustrate AV Fans". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018.
 Evangelista, Chris; Sciretta, Peter (November 29, 2018). "Everything We Learned From The Russo Brothers About 'Infinity War', 'Avengers 4' and 'Star Wars'". /Film. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018.
 Salan, Taylor (November 29, 2018). "Everything We Learned About Avengers: Infinity War From the Russo Brothers' Q&A". SuperHero Hype. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 20, 2018). "'Deadpool 2' Sets Fox Record With $176M Overseas Bow; 'Avengers: Infinity War' Tops $1.81B WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 20, 2018.
 McNary, Dave (June 12, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Soars to $2 Billion at Worldwide Box Office". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 "2018 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2018.
 Busch, Anita; D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 13, 2018). "'Infinity War' Is Now Second-Fastest To Half Billion; 'Life of the Party' No Pizzazz With $18M+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
 "Avengers: Endgame (2019)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 1, 2019.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 4, 2018). "Weekend Box Office: 'Avengers: Infinity War' Crosses $1B in Record Time". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 Mendelson, Scott (June 12, 2018). "Box Office: 'Avengers: Infinity War' Tops $2 Billion Worldwide". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 28, 2018). "'Solo: A Star Wars Story' Stalls With $68M Overseas Bow; What Clipped The Falcon's Wings? – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 13, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Crushes $200M China Bow To Cross $1B Overseas; #5 WW Release Ever On $1.6B+ – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
 Alexander, Bryan (December 28, 2017). "Fans pick 'Avengers,' 'Black Panther' as 2018's most-anticipated films in Fandango poll". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 29, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (March 16, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Breaks a Pre-Sales Record in Just Six Hours". Variety. Archived from the original on March 17, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 Chapman, Tom (March 20, 2018). "Infinity War Shatters Black Panther's Advance Ticket Sales Record". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018.
 McClintock, Pamela (April 11, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Beating 'Black Panther' to Set New Presales Record". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 11, 2018. Retrieved April 11, 2018.
 Fritz, Ben (April 19, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' on Track for Heroic Opening". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 19, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 1, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Posts April Monday Record With $25M+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 2, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Ties 'Force Awakens' As Fastest Title To $300M, Will Make Another $100M+ This Weekend". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 20, 2018). "'Deadpool 2' Swinging in As Second-Best Opening For R-Rated Pic With $125M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 20, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 28, 2018). "Why Is 'Solo' Flying So Low at the B.O.? Memorial Day Opening Now At $103M – Monday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 23, 2018). "'Deadpool 2' Nabs 2nd-Best Tuesday For R-Rated Pic; 'Infinity War' 2nd-Fastest To $600M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 23, 2018. Retrieved May 23, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 3, 2018). "'Solo' Hits Asteroid With $29M+; 'Action Point' Condemned To $2M+: Post-Memorial Day Blues at the B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 5, 2018. Retrieved June 4, 2018. 
D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 10, 2018). "'Ocean's 8' Steals Franchise Record With $41.5M Opening – Final Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 11, 2018. Retrieved June 11, 2018. 
D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 18, 2018). "'Incredibles 2' Record $183M Beats 'Captain America: Civil War' Opening & Lifetime Totals Of 'Cars 3', 'A Bug's Life'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved June 18, 2018. 
D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 24, 2018). "'Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom' With $150M Reps Uni's 2nd Highest Opening Ever – Sunday". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018.
 "All Time Domestic Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved June 16, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (April 30, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War's Record Global Bow Rockets To $641M; Overseas Open Lifts To $383M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (April 28, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Crushes $179M In 3 Days Overseas; Record Global Bow In Sight". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018.
 Robbins, Shawn (April 30, 2018). "Weekend Actuals: 'Avengers: Infinity War' Snaps Domestic ($257.7M) & Global ($640.4M) Opening Records In Historic Debut". BoxOffice. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2018.
 "Премьеру "Мстителей" перенесли из-за российского фильма". Радио Свобода (in Russian). April 23, 2019. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved June 23, 2019.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 4, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Lights Up $900M+ At Global Box Office On Way To $1B Speed Record". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 ZX, ZX (May 12, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' pockets 800 mln yuan on 2nd day in China". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved May 12, 2018.
 Bhowal, Tiasa (May 10, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War Box Office Collection Day 12 – First Hollywood Film To Make Over 200 Crore In India". NDTV. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 11, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Rockets To China's 3rd Biggest Opening Day; Swings Past 'Jungle Book' As India's Top Hollywood Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (June 3, 2018). "'Solo' Scruffy With $115M Overseas To Date; 'Deadpool 2' Retakes #1 & Nears $600M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 5, 2018. Retrieved June 4, 2018.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (June 17, 2018). "'Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom' Rises To $370M Overseas; 'Incredibles 2' Powers $52M Early Bow – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved June 18, 2018.
 "Avengers: Infinity War Reviews: It's Both Amazing and Exhausting". Rotten Tomatoes. April 27, 2018. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 Avengers: Infinity War at Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on April 27, 2018. Retrieved December 16, 2019.
 Avengers: Infinity War at Metacritic. CBS Interactive.
 McCarthy, Todd (April 24, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018.
 Gleiberman, Owen (April 24, 2018). "Film Review: 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018.
 Travers, Peter (April 24, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Review: All-Star Marvel Team-Up Is Superhero Pile-Up". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018.
 Roeper, Richard (April 24, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' unites Stark and Star-Lord in a massive Marvel mashup". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 25, 2018.
 Spiegel, Josh (April 28, 2018). "Why 'Avengers: Infinity War' May Feel Unsatisfying". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
 Scott, A. O. (April 24, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War': It's Marvel's Universe. We Just Live in It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018.
 Brody, Richard (April 27, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War,' Reviewed: The Latest Marvel Movie Is a Two-and-a-Half-Hour Ad for All the Previous Marvel Movies". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on April 30, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
 Zacharek, Stephanie (April 24, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War Checks All the Boxes. That's Exactly What's Wrong With It". Time. Archived from the original on April 26, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2018.
 Chang, Justin (April 24, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War': a rousing Marvel mash-up, or a truly epic tease?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018.
 Alexander, Julia (June 8, 2018). "YouTuber watches Avengers: Infinity War 44 times in theaters, vows to keep going". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Drum, Nicole (July 18, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Super-Fan Crosses Over 100 Viewings". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Nem: The Infinity Watcher [@NemRaps] (July 19, 2018). "Done 😀 103rd time watching #InfinityWar" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018 – via Twitter.
 Bojan, Anne-Marie (June 2018). "Avengers Super Fan Has Seen Infinity War 100 Times With Tickets To Prove It". UNILAD. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Roberson, Chris Chan (May 11, 2018). "Oh Snap: 25 Memes Only People Who Have Seen Infinity War Will Get". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Clark, Travis (May 2, 2018). "The sad ending of 'Infinity War' has inspired a hilarious meme". Business Insider. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Dillon, Ananda (May 2, 2018). "Infinity War: Find Out If You Were Killed By Thanos". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Alexander, Julia (July 3, 2018). "A Thanos-inspired subreddit is about to ban more than 100,000 members". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Elderkin, Beth (July 9, 2018). "Thanos Has Snapped His Fingers and Killed Half of a Subreddit". io9. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Drum, Nicole (July 8, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Directors Join in Thanos' Reddit Culling". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Tigani, Andrew (July 8, 2018). "Infinity War: Josh Brolin Delivers Thanos' Snap For Reddit User Ban". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Farokhmanesh, Megan (July 10, 2018). "Thanos subreddit successfully bans half its community". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 "Oscar Nominations 2019: The Complete List". Variety. January 22, 2019. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019.
 Giardina, Carolyn (February 3, 2019). "Annie Awards: 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Wins Best Animated Feature". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved February 3, 2019.
 Anderson, Erik (December 27, 2018). "'Beale Street,' 'The Favourite' lead Austin Film Critics Association (AFCA) nominations". Awards Watch. Archived from the original on December 28, 2018. Retrieved December 27, 2018.
 "Lady Gaga, 'Bohemian Rhapsody' Nominated For 2019 BAFTA Awards". Billboard. January 9, 2019. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved January 10, 2019.
 Schmidt, Ingrid (February 19, 2019). "'The Favourite,' 'Black Panther' Take Home Honors at Costume Designers Guild Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 30, 2019.
 Johnson, Zach (December 10, 2018). "Critics' Choice Awards 2019: The Complete List of Nominations". E!. Archived from the original on December 10, 2018. Retrieved December 10, 2018.
 "'The Favourite' Leads Florida Film Critics Awards Nominations". Florida Film Critics Circle. December 19, 2018. Archived from the original on December 20, 2018. Retrieved December 21, 2018.
 "8th annual GAFCA Award Winners and Nominees". Georgia Film Critics Association. January 7, 2019. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved January 12, 2019.
 "The 20th Annual Golden Trailer Award Winners". Golden Trailer Awards. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved June 5, 2019.
 Lynch, Joe (December 7, 2018). "Grammys 2019 Nominees: The Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved June 30, 2019.
 Kilday, Gregg (October 30, 2018). "Hollywood Film Awards: 'Black Panther,' 'Incredibles 2' Among Latest Honorees". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 30, 2018. Retrieved October 30, 2018.
 "2019 Hugo Awards". World Science Fiction Society. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
 "Los Angeles Online Film Critics Society Announces Its 2nd Year Nominations". Los Angeles Online Film Critics Society. December 3, 2018. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved January 30, 2019.
 "Los Angeles Online Film Critics Society Award Winners Announced!". Los Angeles Online Film Critics Society. December 7, 2018. Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved January 30, 2019.
 Tapley, Kristopher (January 18, 2019). "'A Quiet Place,' 'Roma,' 'Jack Ryan' Among Golden Reel Nominees for Sound Editing". Variety. Archived from the original on January 18, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019.
 Bell, Crystal (May 3, 2018). "2018 MTV Movie & TV Awards Nominations: See The Full List". MTV. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 Howard, Annie (February 26, 2019). "Kids' Choice Awards: 'Avengers: Infinity War' Tops Nominees; DJ Khaled to Host". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 27, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2019.
 THR Staff (November 11, 2018). "People's Choice Awards: Complete List of Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 12, 2018. Retrieved November 11, 2018.
 "Roma, A Star is Born, Set for Top Honors at 23rd Satellite™ Awards". International Press Academy. December 3, 2018. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved December 3, 2018.
 Mancuso, Vinnie (July 15, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame', 'Game of Thrones' Lead the 2019 Saturn Awards Nominations". Collider. Retrieved July 15, 2019.
 Hipes, Patrick (December 12, 2018). "SAG Awards Nominations: 'A Star Is Born', 'Mrs. Maisel', 'Ozark' Lead Way – The Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
 "'The Favourite' Leads the 2018 Seattle Film Critics Society Nominations". Seattle Film Critics Society. December 10, 2018. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved December 10, 2018.
 "'Roma' Named Best Picture of 2018 by Seattle Film Critics Society". Seattle Film Critics Society. December 17, 2018. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018.
 "2018 StLFCA Annual Award Winners". St. Louis Film Critics Association. December 9, 2018. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2018.
 "Teen Choice Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. August 12, 2018. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved August 12, 2018.
 Tapley, Kristopher (January 15, 2019). "Avengers,' 'Lost in Space,' 'Ready Player One' Lead Visual Effects Society Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved January 17, 2019.
 WAFCA Staff (December 3, 2018). "2018 WAFCA Awards Winners". Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved December 3, 2018.
 Truitt, Brian (December 7, 2018). "It's finally here! Watch the first trailer for Marvel's newly titled 'Avengers: Endgame'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Avengers: Infinity War
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Avengers: Infinity War.
Official website
Avengers: Infinity War at AllMovie
Avengers: Infinity War on IMDb
Avengers: Infinity War
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BNE: XX5811994 LCCN: no2018048451 VIAF: 18152501073810680861 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 18152501073810680861
Video-x-generic.svgFilm portalFlag of the United States.svgUnited States portalDragon-149393.svgSpeculative fiction portal
Categories: 2018 filmsEnglish-language films2010s science fiction action films2010s superhero films2018 3D filmsAlien invasions in filmsAmerican 3D filmsAmerican science fantasy filmsAmerican science fiction action filmsAmerican science fiction adventure filmsAmerican science fiction war filmsAmerican sequel filmsAmerican space adventure filmsApocalyptic filmsAvengers (film series)Crossover filmsFilicide in fictionFilms about extraterrestrial lifeFilms directed by Anthony and Joe RussoFilms featuring anthropomorphic charactersFilms scored by Alan SilvestriFilms set in 2018Films set in AfricaFilms set in EdinburghFilms set in New York (state)Films set in New York CityFilms set in WakandaFilms set on fictional planetsFilms shot at Pinewood Atlanta StudiosFilms shot in AtlantaFilms shot in EdinburghFilms shot in GlasgowFilms shot in Highland (council area)Films shot in New York CityFilms shot in the PhilippinesFilms using computer-generated imageryFilms with screenplays by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeelyGenocide in fictionIMAX filmsIntergalactic travel in fictionMarvel Cinematic Universe filmsMotion capture in filmNanotechnology in fictionOverpopulation fiction
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
中文
فارسی
Română
پښتو
Italiano
اردو
Azərbaycanca
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Tiếng Việt
60 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 July 2020, at 01:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 Page semi-protected
Avengers: Endgame
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Avengers: Endgame
The theatrical release poster for "Avengers: Endgame". The characters depicted are seen on a starry background.
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	
Anthony Russo
Joe Russo
Produced by	Kevin Feige
Screenplay by	
Christopher Markus
Stephen McFeely
Based on	
The Avengers
by Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
Starring	
Robert Downey Jr.
Chris Evans
Mark Ruffalo
Chris Hemsworth
Scarlett Johansson
Jeremy Renner
Don Cheadle
Paul Rudd
Brie Larson
Karen Gillan
Danai Gurira
Benedict Wong
Jon Favreau
Bradley Cooper
Gwyneth Paltrow
Josh Brolin
Music by	Alan Silvestri
Cinematography	Trent Opaloch
Edited by	
Jeffrey Ford
Matthew Schmidt
Production
company
Marvel Studios
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release date
April 22, 2019 (Los Angeles Convention Center)
April 26, 2019 (United States)
Running time
181 minutes[1]
Country	United States[2]
Language	English
Budget	$356 million[3]
Box office	$2.798 billion[3]
Avengers: Endgame is a 2019 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team the Avengers, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. It is the direct sequel to Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and the 22nd film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). It was directed by Anthony and Joe Russo and written by Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely, and features an ensemble cast including Robert Downey Jr., Chris Evans, Mark Ruffalo, Chris Hemsworth, Scarlett Johansson, Jeremy Renner, Don Cheadle, Paul Rudd, Brie Larson, Karen Gillan, Danai Gurira, Benedict Wong, Jon Favreau, Bradley Cooper, Gwyneth Paltrow, and Josh Brolin. In the film, the surviving members of the Avengers and their allies attempt to reverse the damage caused by Thanos in Infinity War.

The film was announced in October 2014 as Avengers: Infinity War – Part 2, but Marvel later removed this title. The Russo brothers joined as directors in April 2015, with Markus and McFeely signing on to write the script a month later. The film serves as a conclusion to the story of the MCU up to that point, ending the story arcs for several main characters. Filming began in August 2017 at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County, Georgia, shooting back-to-back with Infinity War, and ended in January 2018. Additional filming took place in the Metro and Downtown Atlanta areas, New York, Scotland, and England. The story revisits several moments from earlier films, bringing back actors and settings from throughout the franchise as well as music from previous films. The official title was revealed in December 2018. With an estimated budget of $356 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

Avengers: Endgame was widely anticipated, and Disney backed the film with Marvel's largest marketing campaign. It premiered in Los Angeles on April 22, 2019, and was theatrically released in the United States on April 26, as part of Phase Three of the MCU. The film received praise for its direction, acting, musical score, action sequences, visual effects, and emotional weight, with critics lauding its culmination of the 22-film story. It grossed nearly $2.8 billion worldwide, surpassing Infinity War's entire theatrical run in just eleven days and breaking numerous box office records, including becoming the highest-grossing film of all time. The film received numerous awards and nominations, including a nomination for Best Visual Effects at the 92nd Academy Awards, three nominations at the 25th Critics' Choice Awards (winning two), and a nomination for Special Visual Effects at the 73rd British Academy Film Awards.


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
4	Music
5	Marketing
6	Release
6.1	Theatrical
6.2	Home media
7	Reception
7.1	Box office
7.2	Critical response
7.3	Accolades
8	Future
9	Notes
10	References
11	External links
Plot
Twenty-three days after Thanos used the Infinity Gauntlet to disintegrate half of all life in the universe,[N 1] Carol Danvers rescues Tony Stark and Nebula from deep space and returns them to Earth, where they reunite with the remaining Avengers—Bruce Banner, Steve Rogers, Thor, Natasha Romanoff, and James Rhodes—and Rocket. Locating Thanos on an uninhabited planet, they plan to use the Infinity Stones to reverse "the Snap", but Thanos reveals he destroyed the Stones to prevent further use. Enraged, Thor decapitates Thanos.

Five years later, Scott Lang escapes from the quantum realm.[N 2] At the Avengers compound, he explains to Romanoff and Rogers he experienced five hours, not years, while trapped. Theorizing the quantum realm could allow time travel, they ask Stark to help them obtain the Stones from the past to undo Thanos' actions in the present. Stark refuses, thinking about his wife, Pepper Potts, and daughter, Morgan, but relents after musing on the death of Peter Parker. Stark, Rocket and Banner, who has since merged his intelligence with the Hulk's strength, build a time machine. Banner notes changing the past does not affect their present; any changes instead create branched alternate realities. He and Rocket visit the Asgardian refugees' new home in Norway—New Asgard—to recruit Thor, now overweight and drinking heavily, despondent over his failure to stop Thanos. In Tokyo, Romanoff recruits Clint Barton, now a vigilante following Thanos' disintegration of his family.

Banner, Lang, Rogers, and Stark travel to New York City in 2012.[N 3] Banner visits the Sanctum Sanctorum and convinces the Ancient One to give him the Time Stone. At Stark Tower, Rogers retrieves the Mind Stone, but Stark and Lang's attempt to steal the Space Stone fails, allowing 2012 Loki to escape with it. Rogers and Stark travel to S.H.I.E.L.D. headquarters in 1970, where Stark obtains an earlier version of the Space Stone and encounters his father, Howard. Rogers steals Pym Particles from Hank Pym to use in returning to the present, and spies lost love Peggy Carter. Meanwhile, Rocket and Thor travel to Asgard in 2013, extracting the Reality Stone from Jane Foster[N 4] and retrieving Thor's hammer, Mjolnir. Nebula and Rhodes travel to Morag in 2014 and steal the Power Stone before Peter Quill can.[N 5]

Rhodes returns to the present with the Power Stone, but Nebula becomes incapacitated when her cybernetic implants link with those of her past self, allowing 2014 Thanos to learn of his future success and the Avengers' attempts to thwart it. Determined to rebuild the whole universe so no one will remember what he has done, Thanos replaces present-day Nebula with 2014 Nebula. Barton and Romanoff travel to Vormir in 2014, where the Soul Stone's keeper, the Red Skull, reveals it can only be acquired by sacrificing someone they love. Romanoff sacrifices herself, allowing Barton to obtain the Soul Stone.

Reuniting in the present, the Avengers place the Stones into a technological gauntlet Stark, Banner and Rocket have created. Banner, the most resistant to the Stones' gamma radiation, is chosen to wield the gauntlet and reverses the disintegrations. Meanwhile, 2014 Nebula uses the time machine to transport 2014 Thanos and his warship to the present, where he attacks the Avengers' compound looking for the Stones. Present Nebula convinces 2014 Gamora to betray Thanos but is unable to convince 2014 Nebula and is forced to kill her. Confronted by Stark, Thor, and a Mjolnir-wielding Rogers, Thanos outmatches them and summons his army from his warship. Stephen Strange arrives with other sorcerers, the restored Avengers and Guardians of the Galaxy, the Ravagers, and the armies of Wakanda and Asgard to fight Thanos and his army. Danvers arrives and destroys Thanos' warship, but Thanos overpowers her and seizes the gauntlet. Stark steals the Stones and uses them to disintegrate Thanos and his army, at the cost of his own life.

Following Stark's funeral, Thor appoints Valkyrie as the new ruler of New Asgard and joins the Guardians. Rogers returns the Infinity Stones and Mjolnir to their original timelines and remains in the past to live with Carter. In the present, an elderly Rogers passes his shield and mantle to Sam Wilson.

Cast
Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man:[4][5] 
According to directors Joe and Anthony Russo, Downey was one of the few actors to read the entire screenplay for the film.[6] Screenwriters Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely knew that Stark's death was inevitable both as a "[move] to selflessness" and as an end to the "chapter" Stark started. They felt that his death was earned after granting him "the perfect retirement life," adding, "That's the life he's been striving for... They got married, they had a kid, it was great. It's a good death. It doesn't feel like a tragedy. It feels like a heroic, finished life."[7] Joe Russo explained that Stark "always knew he was going to die because he could never reconcile that notion in himself of not protecting the universe," and added that Stark was the most defiant among the Avengers since "Stark is the most formidable of all of them... because of his heart."[8] The Russos sought Downey's approval for Stark's arc, which they had developed since Captain America: Civil War (2016).[9]
Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America:[10] 
Markus described Rogers as someone who is "moving toward some sort of enlightened self-interest." Both he and McFeely knew he was going to get "the dance" he promised Peggy Carter in Captain America: The First Avenger (2011), with McFeely saying, "He's postponed a life in order to fulfill his duty. That's why I didn't think we were ever going to kill him. Because that's not the arc. The arc is, I finally get to put my shield down because I've earned that."[7] Patrick Gorman provided on-set reference for an elderly Steve Rogers.[11][12]
Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner / Hulk:[13] 
In this film, Banner has managed to balance his two sides with gamma experimentation, enabling him to combine his intelligence with the Hulk's strength and physical stature,[14] based on the "Professor Hulk" comic book identity.[15] Compared to other heroes, who were demotivated by their loss against Thanos, Banner is the only character to remain hopeful, with Anthony Russo explaining, "Banner is the sole character who is actually forging into a bright new future, trying to build something totally new and find something completely new... Banner is the one who is most heroic in a sense that he maintains his will to keep trying."[16] This concludes a character arc that was established in Thor: Ragnarok and continued in Avengers: Infinity War.[17]
Chris Hemsworth as Thor:[10] 
Thor now wields a mystical axe known as Stormbreaker, after the destruction of his hammer, Mjolnir, in Thor: Ragnarok.[18] In the film, Thor has become an overweight, drunken ruler of Asgard's refugees in Tønsberg, Norway. Referencing this drastic character change, Hemsworth said, "I just had an opinion. I wanted to do something different this time. Each film I've wanted to, in particular, the last couple, and they were on board," and added, "We shot for many hours and days and discussed how far could we push (Thor) and what we could do different."[19] Anthony Russo added, "Even though there's a lot of fun to be had in the movie with his physical condition, it's not a gag. It's a manifestation of where he is on a character level, and we think it's one of the most relatable aspects of him. I mean, it's a very common sort of response to depression and pain."[20] Thor's story was his favorite arc, saying, "Part of Chris' magic as a comedic actor is his dedication to the depth of the character on a very earnest level... It's so devious and subversive when comedy is coming from a place of complete commitment and emotional complexity."[21] Hemsworth underwent around three hours of hair and makeup for the transformation, which also required him to wear a large silicone prosthetic suit; he called himself "Lebowski Thor" on set.[22] Initially, Thor was supposed to revert to his "old chiseled self" in the middle of Endgame, but Hemsworth successfully argued in favor of retaining Thor's new physique.[22]
Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow:[23][5] 
At the beginning of the film, Romanoff continues to command several teams from around the galaxy in the Avengers headquarters, which Joe Russo explained was stemmed from her inability to move on from their failure to stop Thanos, saying, "she's doing everything she can to try and hold the community together... She's the watcher on the wall still."[24] On the decision for Romanoff to sacrifice herself for Barton to acquire the Soul Stone to bring back everyone, Joe Russo stated that it was part of a larger theme exploring the desire to sacrifice, compared to the desire to protect in Infinity War; he says, "When she gets to that [Soul Stone] scene, I think she understands that the only way to bring the community back is for her to sacrifice herself."[24] McFeely stated, "Her journey, in our minds, had come to an end if she could get the Avengers back. She comes from such an abusive, terrible, mind-control background, so when she gets to Vormir and she has a chance to get the family back, that's a thing she would trade for."[7] To prepare for the film, Johansson underwent a high-intensity workout regimen, which included plyometrics, Olympic weightlifting and gymnastics, as well as a time-restricted eating diet, all under the supervision of her longtime trainer, Eric Johnson, with whom she had worked since Iron Man 2 (2010), the film which introduced her character.[25]
Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye:[26][27][28] 
McFeely described Barton's dark turn as "a good example of people who had much stronger stories after the Snap."[7] The film's cold open, which features the disintegration of Barton's family, was initially supposed to be in Infinity War following Thanos' snap; however, it was moved to Endgame instead, with Markus explaining that it was "going to blunt the brutality of what [Thanos] did."[7] Joe Russo felt it was "a very tragic scene to open the movie with. It's one of the few scenes in the movie that actually makes me tear up when I watch it, because I think about my own family... And then you think about what would happen to you, as a father. You'd become very self-destructive."[16]
Don Cheadle as James "Rhodey" Rhodes / War Machine:[29] 
Cheadle described Rhodes's newfound belonging as an Avenger as "not so much straddling one foot in the military. He's much more on the side of The Avengers than he was prior."[30] This is reflected on Rhodes's more instinctive and realist worldview in the midst of encountering the fantastic, with Cheadle explaining, "He's definitely got some 'what-the-eff-is-happening' [attitude,] more than maybe the rest of them do, given his background. But it's a trial by fire, and he's quickly adapted to what [the threat] is, rather than what he wishes it were."[30]
Paul Rudd as Scott Lang / Ant-Man:[5] 
Lang is portrayed by twins Bazlo and Loen LeClair as a baby, by Jackson A. Dunn at age 12, and by Lee Moore at age 89.[31] This was Moore's final film before his death in August 2018.[32] Markus explained that adding Lang helped with implementing time travel into the film, saying, "we had access to him in the second movie, and the fact that he was bringing a whole subset of technology that did have something to do with a different concept of time was like a birthday present."[33]
Brie Larson as Carol Danvers / Captain Marvel:[34][35] 
Markus stated that Danvers's powers are on a scale that has not previously existed in the MCU and likened her personality to Rogers's, "which is sort of a person who's right and knows they're right and doesn't really want to hear it when you tell them they're wrong".[36] Danvers has little screen time in the film, which McFeely reasoned as "not the story we're trying to tell—it's the original Avengers dealing with loss and coming to a conclusion, and she's the new, fresh blood."[7] Larson filmed her scenes for Endgame before beginning work on her solo film Captain Marvel, which was released first. Captain Marvel directors Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck were present for the filming of her scenes in Endgame and gave Danvers's characterization in the film their blessing.[37]
Karen Gillan as Nebula:[38] 
After being previously featured as an antagonist or an anti-hero in previous MCU films, Nebula undergoes a redemption arc in the film where she makes amends for her past actions, including an encounter with a past version of herself, with Gillan adding that she is "staring her former self in the face and it's really clear how far she's come from that angry, bitter and twisted person. She's starting to connect with other people and find some level of forgiveness."[39] Gillan guessed that Nebula would play a prominent role in the film when she realized that Infinity War and Endgame would be adapted from The Infinity Gauntlet, which she had previously read when she was initially cast as Nebula in Guardians of the Galaxy (2014).[39] Gillan shared several scenes with Downey in the film's opening, and the two improvised most of their scenes together.[39]
Danai Gurira as Okoye[40]
Benedict Wong as Wong
Jon Favreau as Happy Hogan[41]
Bradley Cooper as Rocket:[42] 
Sean Gunn was again the stand-in for Rocket during filming, with his acting and expressions serving as motion reference for the character.[43] Rocket's appearance in the film continues a story arc that was established by Guardians of the Galaxy writer-director and Endgame executive producer James Gunn in the first two Guardians of the Galaxy films, was continued in Infinity War and Endgame, and will conclude in the upcoming Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3.[44]
Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts:[41] Potts wears a weaponized powered exosuit of armor made for her by Stark, based on the Rescue armor.[45][46] Paltrow said this would be her final major appearance in the MCU.[47]
Josh Brolin as Thanos:[48][49] 
Joe Russo said that after Thanos was successful in Avengers: Infinity War, he is now "done. He did it. He's retired."[50] Markus and McFeely had difficulty in factoring the older, post-Infinity War, Thanos into the film due to the character already possessing the Infinity Stones, until executive producer Trinh Tran suggested that they kill Thanos in the film's first act.[7] Markus explained that the character's early death "reinforced Thanos' agenda. He was done... it was like, 'If I've got to die, I can die now.'"[7] Thanos has less screen time in Endgame than in Infinity War, where he was considered the main character, as explained by McFeely: "We had to give ourselves permission to backseat the villain a little bit. I don't think anyone in the first half of the movie is going, 'Oh I wish there was a villain'. You're rolling around in the loss and the time heist, and you think it's sort of Avengers against nature." The younger version of Thanos was nicknamed "Warrior Thanos" by the filmmakers.[16] In addition to providing the voice for the character, Brolin performed motion capture on set.[51] Joe Russo was a stand-in for Thanos for some scenes opposite Nebula.[52]
Several actors from Infinity War reprise their roles in Endgame, including Benedict Cumberbatch as Dr. Stephen Strange,[53] Chadwick Boseman as T'Challa / Black Panther,[54] Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider-Man,[55] Zoe Saldana as Gamora,[56] Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch,[57] Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon,[58] Sebastian Stan as Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier,[59] Tom Hiddleston as Loki,[60] Pom Klementieff as Mantis,[61] Dave Bautista as Drax the Destroyer,[62] Letitia Wright as Shuri,[63] William Hurt as Thaddeus Ross,[64] Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill,[31] Winston Duke as M'Baku,[65] Tom Vaughan-Lawlor as Ebony Maw,[66] Jacob Batalon as Ned,[66] Vin Diesel as Groot,[31] Chris Pratt as Peter Quill / Star-Lord,[57] Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury,[64] Ross Marquand as Red Skull / Stonekeeper,[64] Michael James Shaw as Corvus Glaive,[31] Terry Notary as Cull Obsidian,[31] and Kerry Condon as the voice of Stark's suit A.I. F.R.I.D.A.Y.[67] Monique Ganderton again provides motion capture for Proxima Midnight.[31]

Also reprising their roles from previous MCU films are Evangeline Lilly as Hope van Dyne / Wasp,[68] Tessa Thompson as Valkyrie,[66] Rene Russo as Frigga,[66] John Slattery as Howard Stark,[66] Tilda Swinton as the Ancient One,[66] Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter,[66] Marisa Tomei as May Parker,[66] Taika Waititi as Korg,[66] Angela Bassett as Ramonda,[64] Michael Douglas as Hank Pym,[66][69] Michelle Pfeiffer as Janet van Dyne,[66] Linda Cardellini as Laura Barton,[66] Maximiliano Hernández as Jasper Sitwell,[66] Frank Grillo as Brock Rumlow,[70] Robert Redford as Alexander Pierce,[66] Callan Mulvey as Jack Rollins,[66] and Ty Simpkins as Harley Keener.[66] Sean Gunn reprised his role as Kraglin Obfonteri and was credited for the role,[31] though it is unclear if footage of his appearance was used.[71] Natalie Portman appears as Jane Foster through the use of footage from a Thor: The Dark World (2013) deleted scene, as well as new voice over that Portman recorded for when Foster appears talking in the distance.[72] James D'Arcy reprises his role as Edwin Jarvis from the MCU television series Agent Carter, marking the first time a character introduced in an MCU television series appears in an MCU film.[73]

Additionally, Hiroyuki Sanada portrays Akihiko, a Yakuza boss operating in Tokyo who opposes Barton.[74][75] Alexandra Rabe portrays Morgan Stark, Tony and Pepper's daughter.[76] Katherine Langford was cast as an older Morgan, but her scene was cut from the final film.[77][78] Emma Fuhrmann portrays an older Cassie Lang, Scott's daughter.[79] Avengers co-creator Stan Lee has a posthumous cameo in the film, appearing digitally de-aged as a car driver in 1970; this is his final film appearance.[80] Ken Jeong and Yvette Nicole Brown cameo as a storage facility guard and a S.H.I.E.L.D. employee, respectively.[66] Co-director Joe Russo (credited as Gozie Agbo) has a cameo appearance as a grieving gay man, which is the first time an openly homosexual character has been portrayed in an MCU film.[81] Joe's daughters Ava and Lia portray Barton's daughter Lila and a fan of Hulk, respectively.[82] Thanos creator Jim Starlin also appears as a grieving man.[82] The character Howard the Duck appears in a non-speaking cameo.[83]

Production
Further information: Production of Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame

The directors, Anthony and Joe Russo
In October 2014, Marvel announced a two-part sequel to Age of Ultron, titled Avengers: Infinity War. Part 1 was scheduled to be released on May 4, 2018, with Part 2 scheduled for May 3, 2019.[84][85] In April 2015, Marvel announced that Anthony and Joe Russo would direct both parts of Avengers: Infinity War,[86] with back-to-back filming expected to begin in 2016.[87] Also in the month, Kevin Feige said the films were titled as two parts of a single film "because they [have] such shared elements", but he would not actually describe them as "one story that's cut in half. I would say it's going to be two distinct movies."[88] By May 2015, Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely signed on to write the screenplays for both parts of the film.[89] The following May, the Russos revealed that they would be retitling the two films, to further remove the misconception that the films were one large film split in two, with Joe stating, "The intention is we will change [the titles], we just haven't come up with [them] yet."[90] In July 2016, Marvel removed the film's title, simply referring to it as Untitled Avengers film.[91] Feige and the Russo brothers indicated the title was being withheld because it would give away plot details for this film and Infinity War.[92][93]

Principal photography began on August 10, 2017,[94] under the working title Mary Lou 2,[95] at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County, Georgia, with Trent Opaloch serving as director of photography.[96][97] The film, along with Infinity War, were shot using IMAX/Arri 2D cameras, thus marking the first time that a Hollywood feature film was shot entirely with IMAX digital cameras.[98] Also in the month, filming occurred in The Gulch area of Downtown Atlanta, near the Five Points MARTA station, and Piedmont Park.[99] Feige explained that the films were originally scheduled to be filmed simultaneously but were ultimately shot back-to-back, as "It became too complicated to cross-board them like that, and we found ourselves—again, something would always pay the price. We wanted to be able to focus and shoot one movie and then focus and shoot another movie."[100] Anthony Russo originally felt it made more sense to shoot the films simultaneously due to financial and logistical reasons considering the large number of cast members,[101] and had suggested that "some days we'll be shooting the first movie and some days we'll be shooting the second movie. Just jumping back and forth."[96] The 2013 Asgard scenes were shot at Durham Cathedral in Durham, England during production of Infinity War in early May 2017.[102][103] Production wrapped on January 11, 2018,[104] although additional filming took place in Dutchess and Ulster counties in New York in June 2018.[105] Reshoots began by September 7, 2018,[106] and concluded on October 12, 2018.[107] More reshoots occurred in January 2019.[108] Location shooting also took place in St Abbs, Scotland, which doubled for New Asgard in Norway.[109] Evans and Hemsworth each earned $15 million for the film.[110]

The film's official title, Avengers: Endgame, and final U.S. release date of April 26, 2019, were revealed with the film's first trailer in December 2018.[111] Visual effects for the film were created by Industrial Light & Magic, Weta Digital, DNEG, Framestore, Cinesite, Digital Domain, Rise, Lola VFX, Cantina Creative, Capital T, Technicolor VFX, and Territory Studio.[112] As with previous MCU films, Lola worked on the de-aging sequences; the film features 200 de-aging and aging shots.[113] Downey, Evans, Ruffalo, Hemsworth, Johansson, and Renner were de-aged to their 2012 appearances for scenes recreated from The Avengers (2012).[12] Michael Douglas, John Slattery, and Stan Lee were also de-aged for the 1970 New Jersey sequence;[114][80] Douglas' appearance in The Streets of San Francisco was referenced.[115] Lola also aged-up Evans for the final scene where he is portrayed as an elderly man, using some make-up and a stand-in as reference.[12] Jeffrey Ford and Matthew Schmidt served as the film's editors.[116]

Music
Main article: Avengers: Endgame (soundtrack)

Alan Silvestri composed the film's score.
In June 2016, Alan Silvestri, who composed the score for The Avengers, was revealed to be returning to score both Infinity War and Endgame.[117] The Russos started working with Silvestri on the Endgame score in early November 2018,[118] and it was completed in late March 2019.[119] A soundtrack album featuring Silvestri's score was released by Hollywood Records digitally on April 26, 2019, with a physical release on May 24.[120] A music video for the track "Portals", composed for the climactic scene in which reinforcements arrive for the Avengers, was released on June 13.[121]

Silvestri described the score as having the most versatile tone of the franchise, ranging from "thunderous percussion and powerful brass" for the action sequences to minimalist, jazz-inspired music for Ant-Man and the quantum realm. Silvestri reprises his themes from the previous Avengers films and Captain America: The First Avenger, including material he wrote for Thanos and the Infinity Stones in Infinity War. He found writing the music to end Captain America's story poignant, since he had "been on this journey with him since the beginning".[122] The film also uses the Ant-Man theme by Christophe Beck, the Doctor Strange theme by Michael Giacchino, and the Captain Marvel theme by Pinar Toprak.[31] Additionally, the songs "Come and Get Your Love" by Redbone and "It's Been a Long, Long Time" by Jule Styne and Sammy Cahn are used, after previously being heard in Guardians of the Galaxy and Captain America: The Winter Soldier, respectively.[123][124]

Marketing
The marketing campaign for Endgame cost over $200 million, the most for any Marvel Studios film.[125] Promotional partners included Stand Up to Cancer, Mastercard, Ulta Beauty, the Audi e-tron GT Concept car (which appears in the film),[126] McDonald's, GEICO, Coca-Cola, Google, General Mills, Hertz, Ziploc, Oppo, and Synchrony Financial.[125]

A year prior to the film's release, Germain Lussier of io9 spoke on the approach Marvel might have to take in marketing the film, given the end of Infinity War where many established characters die. He questioned if those characters would appear on posters and in toy campaigns and if the actors portraying them would participate in press events leading up to the film's release. Lussier felt Disney and Marvel could focus on the original Avengers team members, who make up the majority of the living characters, but noted it would be more beneficial to show the return of the dead characters, which would "build a mystery and curiosity about how they come back. It could create a whole new level of interest about the film while having all the stars front and center, as they should be".[127] Feige spoke to this in June 2018, stating that these dead characters would not be featured in any marketing for the film.[128] He presented a behind-the-scenes video from the film at CineEurope,[129][130] and said that the official marketing campaign for the film would begin at the end of 2018.[131] In early December 2018, ahead of the first trailer's release, Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter spoke to the "fevered anticipation" surrounding it. McMillan felt what was so remarkable about the anticipation, was that it was mostly "fan-created, without noticeable direction from Marvel or the filmmakers involved" and that the amount of knowledge surrounding the film without any type of promotion was "a kind of brand awareness that most studios would kill for". Because of this, McMillan urged Marvel not to release any trailers for the film since "the advanced level of enthusiasm that's already out there for the movie... is only likely to build as it gets closer to" the film's release. That said, he added that the eventual release of the trailer would take away the "Schrödinger's cat-esque position... it currently enjoys" as it was "almost guaranteed to disappoint fans" at this point.[132]

The first trailer for the film was released on December 7, 2018.[133] Dustin Sandoval, vice president of digital marketing for Marvel Studios, stated the marketing team "actively made the choice not to include the title or hashtag of the movie in our trailer posts so fans could see it at the end reveal without it being spoiled".[134] Richard Newby, also of The Hollywood Reporter felt, while not much new was revealed in the trailer, it "offers a somber glimpse of a universe made unrecognizable" and lets the viewer "sit, rightfully so, with the ending of Avengers: Infinity War and our questions of loss". Newby also noted how the trailer "calls back to beginnings of the MCU... [as] the visual language used in the trailer does a great service by highlighting these characters' humble beginnings", and concluded it leaves viewers with "just as many questions as we had before".[133] Austen Goslin of Polygon pointed out that the title not only references a line Doctor Strange tells Tony Stark in Infinity War, but also a line spoken by Stark in Avengers: Age of Ultron. Goslin said, "The scene surrounding this line in Age of Ultron is one of the most important ones in the movie. Things look dark, and the group of heroes face an enemy they don't think they can defeat." As such, the Endgame trailer "mirrors this perfectly" and "shows us that the Avengers' two most prominent characters are who they've always been: Iron Man, a pessimist who keeps fighting no matter how hopeless things look, and Captain America, an optimist who believes that nothing is hopeless when the world's heroes fight together".[135] The trailer was viewed 289 million times in its first 24 hours, becoming the most viewed trailer in that time period, surpassing the record of Avengers: Infinity War (230 million views). The trailer also set a record for Twitter conversation for a film trailer in the first 24 hours, generating 549,000 mentions.[136] By January 3, 2019, BoxOffice's "Trailer Impact" metric service indicated approximately 77–78% of people surveyed who viewed the Endgame trailer in the past three weeks had expressed interest in seeing the film. In the three weeks it was measured by the service, the trailer was number one for all and had the top two percent of respondents express interest in seeing the film since the service's introduction in March 2018.[137]

The second trailer for the film, along with the theatrical release poster, was released on March 14, 2019. All 13 actors featured on the poster received top-billing except for Danai Gurira, whose name still appeared in the poster's bottom billing block along with Benedict Wong, Jon Favreau, and Gwyneth Paltrow (none of whom were featured on the poster). Despite this, her exclusion in the top billing prompted criticism from some fans.[40][138] Petrana Radulovic of Polygon noted how an actor is credited on the poster "is a complex process" based on 'dealing with agents, fees, and movie star demands."[40] However, Marvel Studios released an updated poster later that day with Gurira in the top billing.[40][138] The second trailer was viewed 268 million times in the first 24 hours, becoming the second most viewed trailer in that time period behind the film's first trailer.[139]

Release
Theatrical
Avengers: Endgame had its world premiere at the Los Angeles Convention Center on April 22, 2019.[140][141] Disney converted the convention center's Hall K for the film's premiere, working with Dolby and QSC Audio to install a 70 foot (21 metres) screen, Dolby Vision projectors, and a Dolby Atmos sound system. The convention center also held the premiere's red carpet arrival and after-party.[141] The film was released in Australia, China, and other parts of Asia and Europe on April 24,[142][143] in the United Kingdom on April 25,[144] in the United States and India on April 26,[61][111] and in Russia on April 29[145] in IMAX and 3D.[146][147] It was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on May 3.[84][85] Radio Liberty alleged that the Russian government postponed the film's release in that country to promote Russian-produced films.[148] Avengers: Endgame is part of Phase Three of the MCU.[149]

Following the release of the second trailer for Marvel Studios' Spider-Man: Far From Home on May 6, Marvel began showing it at the end of Endgame screenings with a message before the film from Far From Home star Tom Holland telling the audience to stay until the end of the credits to see the trailer.[150] In June, Feige announced that Avengers: Endgame would be re-released in theaters with seven minutes of new post-credits footage, including a Stan Lee tribute, an unfinished deleted scene, and the opening scene of Far From Home. A limited edition poster would also be given out at select theaters.[151] The re-release began on June 28 in the United States, across 1,040 theaters.[152]

Home media
Avengers: Endgame was released in the US on digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on July 30, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on August 13.[153] The film was released on both Digital HD and Blu-ray on September 2 in the UK.[154] Streaming is exclusive to Disney+ since November 12.[155] The digital and Blu-ray releases include behind-the-scenes featurettes, audio commentary, deleted scenes, and a blooper reel.[153] Despite being filmed with IMAX cameras and released in IMAX theaters in the 1.90:1 aspect ratio, the home media release only includes the cropped 2.39:1 aspect ratio version that was used for non-IMAX screenings.[156]

Reception
Avengers: Endgame, which was widely anticipated for months before its release, had a substantial cultural impact. In 2019, following the death of Tony Stark in the film, a statue depicting the character in his Iron Man armor was erected in Forte dei Marmi, Italy.[157]

Box office
Main article: List of box office records set by Avengers: Endgame
Avengers: Endgame grossed $858.4 million in the United States and Canada, and $1.939 billion in other territories, for a worldwide total of $2.8 billion.[3] It is the highest-grossing film of all time,[158] as well as the second-highest-grossing film of all time in the United States and Canada. Adjusted for inflation, Gone with the Wind (1939) remains the highest-grossing film, and Avengers: Endgame is the fifth-highest-grossing film of all time worldwide.[159]

The film had a worldwide opening of $1.2 billion, the biggest of all time and nearly double Infinity War's previous record of $640.5 million.[160] It was also the fastest film ever to eclipse the $1 billion and $1.5 billion mark, doing so in just five days and eight days respectively (less than half what it took Infinity War).[161] Deadline Hollywood estimated the film would break even just five days after its release, which is "unheard of for a major studio tentpole during its opening weekend".[162] The website eventually calculated the final net profit of the film to be $890 million, accounting for production budgets, P&A, talent participations, and other costs, with box office grosses and ancillary revenues from home media, placing it first on their list of 2019's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[163]

On May 4, the film's earnings at the global box office passed the entire theatrical run of Infinity War and became the fastest film ever to gross $2 billion worldwide, amassing the amount in only 11 days (beating Avatar that did so in 47 days).[164] It also became the fifth film to surpass this threshold (after Avatar, Titanic, Star Wars: The Force Awakens, and Infinity War),[165] and the second film to surpass the threshold of $2.5 billion, doing so in just 20 days, outpacing Avatar's record of 72 days.[166] At the 2019 San Diego Comic-Con, Feige announced that Disney had overlooked $2 million of weekday ticket sales when doing accounting and that Endgame would surpass Avatar's total box office return that weekend to be the highest-grossing film.[158]

Pre-sale records
In late December 2018, Endgame was named the second-most anticipated 2019 film by IMDb behind Captain Marvel, the most anticipated 2019 blockbuster according to the ticketing service Fandango,[167] and the most anticipated overall film by Atom Tickets.[168]

Due to the high demand when pre-sale tickets became available in the U.S. on April 2, 2019, customers on both Atom Tickets and Fandango experienced long wait times and system delays, while AMC Theatres' website and app crashed completely for several hours. The same day, Fandango announced the film became its top-selling pre-sale title for the first 24 hours, topping Star Wars: The Force Awakens' previous record in just six hours. Atom said the film was also the website's best-selling first-day film (outselling Aquaman by four times), and Regal Cinemas reported that Endgame had sold more tickets in its first eight hours than Infinity War did in its entire first week.[169][170] The film grossed $120–140 million in pre-sales alone.[145] The day prior to the film's release, Fandango announced it was its biggest pre-selling title of all time, beating The Force Awakens, with over 8,000 sold-out showtimes across the country.[171]

In India, the film sold one million tickets in just one day for the English, Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu language screenings; 18 tickets were sold every second.[145] In China, pre-sale tickets became available on April 12 and sold a record one million tickets in just six hours, outselling Infinity War's first 24-hour total within the first hour,[172] and made $114.5 million (RMB 770 million) just from pre-sales.[173]

United States and Canada

Chart of the North American box office gross of Avengers: Endgame against the four highest-grossing films in the market
On April 4, industry tracking projected the film would gross $200–250 million domestically during its opening weekend, although some insiders saw those figures as conservative and expected a $260–300 million-debut.[174][175] By the week of its release, domestic estimates had risen to $260–270 million, with some insiders still suggesting a $300 million debut was possible. The film played in 4,662 theaters, 410 of which were in IMAX; it is the widest release ever, surpassing the record of Despicable Me 3's 4,529 theaters.[145][176] Avengers: Endgame earned $357.1 million in its opening weekend, breaking Infinity War's record by nearly $100 million. It also set records for Friday ($157.5 million, including $60 million from Thursday night previews), Saturday ($109.3 million) and Sunday ($90.4 million) totals, as well as was more of a total gross alone than the previous box office high of all films combined ($314 million).[161] The film then made $36.9 million on Monday and $33.1 million on Tuesday, both the third-highest of all time.[177][178] In its second weekend the film made $147.4 million (the second-best sophomore frame ever) for a 10-day total of $621.3 million. It was the fastest film to ever pass the $600 million milestone, beating The Force Awakens' 12 days and less than half the 26 days it took Infinity War.[179] The following week, the film grossed $64.8 million, the fourth-best third weekend ever. It also passed the $700 million mark, tying The Force Awakens' record of 16 days.[180] Endgame was finally dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum, however its $29.3 million was enough for it to pass Avatar as the second-highest-grossing film ever domestically.[181] It made $17.2 million the following weekend (and a total of $22.3 million over the four-day Memorial Day frame), crossing the $800 million threshold domestically.[182] During the re-release, which occurred over its tenth weekend, the film was added to 1,040 theaters and made $6.1 million, an increase of 207% from the previous weekend.[183] In its thirteenth weekend the film made $1.2 million, which put it over the threshold to top Avatar's all-time record, and brought its running domestic total to $854.2 million.[184]

Other territories
Internationally, Endgame was projected to gross around $680 million over its first five days for a global debut of $850–950 million.[176][185][145] The film was initially projected to gross $250–280 million in China in its opening weekend,[145] but made a record $107.5 million (RMB 719 million) in the country on its first day, including $28.2 million (RMB 189 million) from midnight, 3 AM and 6 am screenings, beating The Fate of the Furious' previous record of $9.1 million. Due to the record-breaking first day, partnered with word of mouth (with a 9.1 on local review aggregator Douban and a 9.3 on ticket website Maoyan), debut projections were increased to over $300 million.[173] Overall, the film made $169 million on the first day from international countries, the highest total of all time. Its largest markets after China were India ($9 million), South Korea ($8.4 million; the largest non-holiday single day gross ever), Australia ($7.1 million), France ($6 million) and Italy ($5.8 million).[160] Like domestically, the film ended up over-performing and debuted to $866.5 million overseas. Not only was it the highest foreign amount ever, but it was single-handedly more than Infinity War's global opening of $640 million. Its largest markets, every one of which set the record for best-ever opening in the country, were China ($330.5 million; RMB 2.22 billion), the United Kingdom ($53.8 million), South Korea ($47.4 million), Mexico ($33.1 million), Australia ($30.8 million), Brazil ($26 million), Spain ($13.3 million), Japan ($13 million)[160] and Vietnam ($10 million).[186] It also made $21.6 million over its first four days in Russia after a delay of its premiere that was caused by the Russian government.[148][187][188]

In its first week, the film's top five largest international markets were China ($459.4 million), the United Kingdom ($68.2 million), South Korea ($60.3 million), Mexico ($48.6 million), and India ($40.9 million).[189] A week after its release, it became the highest-grossing foreign film of all time in China[190] and India.[191] In its second weekend the film's running total passed $1.569 billion from international markets, passing Titanic as the second-highest film overseas of all time.[165]

As of August 25, 2019, the film's top international markets were China ($614 million), United Kingdom ($115 million), South Korea ($105 million), Brazil ($86 million), and Mexico ($78 million).[3]

Critical response






The performances of (top, L to R) Robert Downey Jr., Chris Evans, Mark Ruffalo, (bottom, L to R) Chris Hemsworth, Scarlett Johansson, and Jeremy Renner as the original six Avengers were widely praised by critics[192]
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 94% with an average score of 8.22/10, based on 519 reviews. The website's critics consensus reads, "Exciting, entertaining, and emotionally impactful, Avengers: Endgame does whatever it takes to deliver a satisfying finale to Marvel's epic Infinity Saga."[193] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 78 out of 100 based on 57 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[194] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare "A+" grade, the third Marvel film to earn the score after The Avengers and Black Panther, while those at PostTrak gave it 5 out of 5 stars and a "definite recommend" of 85%.[161]

Writing for NPR, Glen Weldon gave the film a positive review and found the film to be a worthy sequel to its predecessor, stating, "The Russos' decision to stick close to the experiences of the remaining Avengers proves a rewarding one, as they've expressly constructed the film as an extended victory lap for the Marvel Cinematic Universe writ large. Got a favorite character from any Marvel movie over the past decade, no matter how obscure? Prepare to get serviced, fan."[195] Peter Travers in his review for Rolling Stone gave the film 4 out of 5 stars, saying, "You don't have to make jokes about the clichéd time travel plot – the film is ready, willing and able to make its own, with Back to the Future coming in for a serious ribbing."[196]

Peter Debruge of Variety wrote, "After the must-see showdown that was Infinity War, the Russo brothers deliver a more fan-facing three-hour follow-up, rewarding loyalty to Marvel Cinematic Universe."[197] J. R. Kinnard of PopMatters wrote, "Big budget action filmmaking doesn't get much better than this."[198] Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said, "[W]hat comes across most strongly here, oddly enough for an effects-driven comic-book-derived film, is the character acting, especially from Downey, Ruffalo, Evans, Hemsworth, Brolin and Paul Rudd".[199] Richard Roeper, writing for the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film four stars and praised its "emotional punch", as well as the "funny, well-paced, smart, expertly rendered screenplay by Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely, crisp direction from Anthony Russo and Joe Russo..., and the universally stellar performances".[200]

The New York Times reviewer A. O. Scott gave the film a positive though guarded review, stating, "Endgame is a monument to adequacy, a fitting capstone to an enterprise that figured out how to be good enough for enough people enough of the time. Not that it's really over, of course: Disney and Marvel are still working out new wrinkles in the time-money continuum. But the Russos do provide the sense of an ending, a chance to appreciate what has been done before the timelines reset and we all get back to work."[201] Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times wrote that "Avengers: Endgame achieves and earns its climactic surge of feeling, even as it falls just short of real catharsis".[202] Some have noted the film as a notable improvement over its predecessor, Avengers: Infinity War, such as Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com, who stated that Endgame is "a more patient, focused film [than Infinity War], even as its plot draws in elements of a dozen other movies."[203] Matt Zoller Seitz, also of RogerEbert.com, gave the film a positive assessment as compared with Infinity War, which he considered "too crowded, too rushed and yet too long". Seitz stated that Endgame is "a heartfelt and satisfying experience", along with being a "surprisingly relaxed, character-driven, self-aware yet sincere comedy [for] two-thirds of [the film]. Much of the script suggests a laid-back Richard Linklater movie with superheroes".[204] Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal acknowledged the unique achievement that Avengers: Endgame accomplished as the conclusion of the Infinity Saga, calling the final battle "inevitably unwieldy ... but thrilling all the same, and followed by a delicate coda. So many stories. So many adventures. So much to sort out before the next cycle starts."[205]

Richard Brody, writing for The New Yorker, was more critical of the film, opining that the good acting was not matched by comparable skill from the directors. He said, "The Russos have peculiarly little sense of visual pleasure, little sense of beauty, little sense of metaphor, little aptitude for texture or composition; their spectacular conceit is purely one of scale, which is why their finest moments are quiet and dramatic ones".[206] Anthony Lane of The New Yorker gave the film a compromising review, finding it to be overdeveloped and overwrought, stating, "The one thing you do need to know about Avengers: Endgame is that it runs for a little over three hours, and that you can easily duck out during the middle hour, do some shopping, and slip back into your seat for the climax. You won't have missed a thing."[207]

Accolades
Main article: List of accolades received by Avengers: Endgame
Avengers: Endgame was nominated for one Academy Award,[208] one Annie Award (won),[209] one British Academy Film Award,[210] three Critics' Choice Awards (winning two),[211] one Grammy Award,[212] one Hollywood Film Award (won),[213] four MTV Movie & TV Awards (winning three),[214] seven People's Choice Awards (winning three),[215] two Satellite Awards,[216] fourteen Saturn Awards (winning six),[217] one Screen Actors Guild Award (won),[218] and nine Teen Choice Awards (winning four),[219] among others.

Future
Further information: List of Marvel Cinematic Universe films § Future
In May 2018, Disney CEO Bob Iger said of Marvel's plans beyond Endgame, "I'm guessing we will try our hand at what I'll call a new franchise beyond Avengers, but that doesn't necessarily mean you won't see more Avengers down the road. We just haven't made any announcements about that." Iger added, "Given the popularity of the characters and given the popularity of the franchise, I don't think people should conclude there will never be another Avengers movie."[220] Shortly after the film's premiere, the Russo brothers said they were not opposed to returning to the MCU in the future due to their positive relationship with Marvel Studios, but did not plan to do so at that time.[221]

Notes
 As depicted in the 2018 film Avengers: Infinity War.
 In which he was trapped at the end of the 2018 film Ant-Man and the Wasp.
 During the events of the 2012 film The Avengers.
 During the events of the 2013 film Thor: The Dark World.
 As depicted in the 2014 film Guardians of the Galaxy.
References
 "Avengers: Endgame". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved May 12, 2019.
 Newman, Kim (April 25, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame review: the finale these heroes deserve". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 Avengers: Endgame at Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019.
 Kit, Borys (April 21, 2016). "Robert Downey Jr. Joins 'Spider-Man: Homecoming'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016.
 Mithaiwala, Mansoor (October 28, 2017). "Robert Downey Jr. Announces Avengers 4 Return". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017. Retrieved November 4, 2017.
 Kennedy, Michael (April 18, 2019). "RDJ Was the Only Avenger to Read the Entire Endgame Script". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019.
 Itzkoff, Dave (April 29, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame': The Screenwriters Answer Every Question You Might Have". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019.
 Breznican, Anthony (May 3, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame directors dismantle Iron Man's closing scene". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2019.
 Couch, Aaron (May 1, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Directors on Seeking Robert Downey Jr.'s Blessing and Marvel's First Gay Character". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2019.
 Chitwood, Adam (April 14, 2015). "Chris Hemsworth Reveals the 3 Marvel Movies Left on His Contract". Collider. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
 Kitchener, Shaun (May 31, 2019). "Avengers Endgame: Captain America 'old man' body double teased twist LONG before release". Daily Express. UK. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2019.
 Sonak, Divij (May 19, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame VFX Supervisor Talks Aging & De-Aging Effects". Appocalypse.com. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019.
 McMillian, Graeme (September 7, 2018). "Mark Ruffalo Suggests 'Avengers 4' Is Still 'In Flux'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 8, 2018. Retrieved September 8, 2018.
 Knight, Rosie (April 25, 2019). "What's Up with Banner and Hulk in Avengers: Endgame?". Nerdist. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 27, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame explained: The Hulk's closing scene". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 "Avengers Endgame: 26 Spoilers Explained By The Directors And Writers". Empire. June 7, 2019. Archived from the original on June 9, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2019.
 Eisenberg, Eric (October 10, 2017). "Apparently Mark Ruffalo And Kevin Feige Have Planned A Special Trilogy for the Hulk". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on October 11, 2017. Retrieved October 10, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 8, 2018). "Behind the scenes of Avengers: Infinity War as new heroes unite – and others will end". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
 Mallenbaum, Carly (April 26, 2019). "Chris Hemsworth wanted a 'different' Thor in 'Avengers: Endgame': Here's how fans reacted". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 Breznican, Anthony (May 1, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame filmmakers defend Thor's startling look". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
 Seetodeh, Ramin (May 28, 2019). "How Chris Hemsworth Found His Way as a Movie Star With Thor and 'The Avengers'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Setoodeh, Ramin (May 28, 2019). "Chris Hemsworth on Secrets of Playing 'Lebowski Thor' in 'Avengers: Endgame'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 29, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Welch, Alex (August 22, 2017). "Black Widow Heads to Japan in Avengers 4 Set Photos". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (May 2, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame directors defend controversial Black Widow scene". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019.
 Romeyn, Kathryn (April 26, 2019). "Scarlett Johansson's 'Avengers' Workout: How to Get a Black Widow Body". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019.
 Stern, Marlow (September 29, 2014). "Jeremy Renner Opens Up About Marriage, His Problems with the Media, and the Future of Hawk-Eye". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2015.
 Ricwulf, Daniel (October 24, 2015). "Jeremy Renner & Michael Douglas Hint at Marvel Team-Up". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2016.
 Cardona, Ian (December 7, 2018). "Avengers 4 Trailer Reveals First Look at Jeremy Renner As Ronin". CBR. Archived from the original on December 8, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
 Damore, Meagan (September 21, 2017). "Paltrow Confirms Avengers 4 Role for Cheadle's War Machine". CBR. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved September 21, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 11, 2019). "Don Cheadle barely knows what happens in Avengers: Endgame — and he's in it". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2019.
 Russo, Anthony; Russo, Joe (Directors) (2019). Avengers: Endgame (Motion picture). Marvel Studios.
 "Lee Moore | Obituary". The Daily Item. August 16, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 Couch, Aaron (May 11, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Writers Share Ideas Abandoned Along the Way". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 12, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2019.
 Robinson, Joanna (November 28, 2017). "What RoboCop Has to Do with the Future of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 29, 2017. Retrieved November 28, 2017.
 Coggan, Devan (September 5, 2018). "Brie Larson takes flight as Captain Marvel on this week's EW cover". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 5, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018.
 Keyes, Rob (March 23, 2018). "Avengers 4 Writers Had Fun With Captain Marvel's Unprecedented Power Level". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 23, 2018. Retrieved March 23, 2018.
 Lussier, Germain (April 9, 2019). "Why Captain Marvel Has on More Make-Up in Endgame Than Her Solo Movie". io9. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved April 11, 2019.
 McLean, Pauline (April 9, 2019). "Karen Gillan on Tupperware Party, Inverness and Avengers". BBC News. Archived from the original on January 17, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2019.
 Yamato, Jen (May 10, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame's' Karen Gillan tells all about Nebula's surprising redemption (and Marvel future)". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 13, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2019.
 Radulovic, Petrana (March 14, 2019). "Marvel changes Avengers: Endgame poster after fan outcry over Danai Gurira's credit omission". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 14, 2019.
 Damore, Meagan (August 22, 2017). "Avengers 4 Set Photos Capture Iron Man Character's Return". CBR. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
 Evans, Mel (October 7, 2018). "Bradley Cooper asked Avengers 4's Russo Brothers if they altered Rocket's voice for Infinity War". Metro. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018.
 Tramel, Jimmie (September 23, 2018). "Tulsa-bound actor Sean Gunn knows Marvel-ous details, but can't share yet". Tulsa World. Archived from the original on September 24, 2018. Retrieved September 25, 2018.
 Fleming Jr., Mike (May 15, 2019). "'Guardians of the Galaxy' Director James Gunn Breaks Silence On High-Profile Disney Firing, & What He Learned From The Career Crisis That Followed – Deadline Disruptors". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2019.
 Boucher, Geoff (November 30, 2018). "Spider-Women, Captain Marvel & Harley Quinn: Females Fly In The Face Of Old Hollywood Perceptions". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 1, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018.
 Carter, Justin (April 28, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame finally gives Pepper Potts one of her famous comic moments". Polygon.com. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2019.
 Setoodeh, Ramin (February 19, 2019). "Gwyneth Paltrow Announces Retirement From Marvel Cinematic Universe". Variety. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 Dolloff, Matt (July 30, 2017). "Josh Brolin Announces Return For Avengers 4 Filming". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017. Retrieved November 23, 2017.
 Peters, Megan (May 19, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Synopsis Released". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2017.
 Schmidt, J. K. (December 22, 2018). "'Avengers: Endgame' Directors Explain How Thanos and the MCU Have Changed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 23, 2018. Retrieved December 24, 2018.
 Busch, Jenna (February 1, 2016). "Josh Brolin on Playing Thanos in the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Superhero Hype!. Archived from the original on February 3, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016.
 Bonomolo, Cameron (November 8, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Director Played Thanos in Karen Gillan's Nebula Scenes". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2020.
 Collis, Clark (October 13, 2016). "Doctor Strange will play a 'very, very important' role in the MCU, Marvel Studios president says". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 15, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2016.
 Perry, Spencer (October 26, 2017). "More Avengers 4 Set Photos Featuring Hulk, Black Panther, and More". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on March 27, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018.
 Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (April 18, 2017). "Marvel's Kevin Feige on Why the Studio Won't Make R-Rated Movies, 'Guardians 2' and Joss Whedon's DC Move". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 18, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017.
 Deen, Sarah (April 24, 2017). "Has Guardians of the Galaxy star Zoe Saldana revealed the name of Avengers 4?". Metro. Archived from the original on April 25, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
 Lincoln, Ross A. (July 29, 2016). "Marvel's 'Avengers 3' Gets Official Title With Temp Name Hung On 'Avengers 4'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved July 30, 2016.
 Palmer, Frank (March 20, 2017). "Exclusive: Anthony Mackie Says FALCON Won't Die". Screen Geek. Archived from the original on March 22, 2017. Retrieved March 21, 2017.
 Ellwood, Gregory (September 11, 2017). "Sebastian Stan Says Marvel Studios Training Put To Good Use On 'I, Tonya' [Interview]". The Playlist. Archived from the original on July 25, 2018. Retrieved September 15, 2017.
 Babbage, Rachel (November 1, 2014). "Loki to appear in Thor: Ragnarok and both parts of Avengers: Infinity War". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 1, 2014. Retrieved November 2, 2014.
 Sandwell, Ian (September 29, 2017). "Another Guardians of the Galaxy star confirms they'll be coming back for Avengers 4". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017. Retrieved September 30, 2017.
 Bautista, Dave [@DaveBautista] (July 17, 2017). "I'll be in China. Bummer! 😔Doing a film with Woo Ping. 😃I'll also miss the premier. 😢Cuz I'll be on @Avengers 4! 😃#goodproblems" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Retrieved July 25, 2017 – via Twitter.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (November 8, 2018). "Hot Package: John Boyega, Letitia Wright To Star In Mike Cahill-Directed Sci-Fi 'Hold Back The Stars'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 9, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018.
 Hood, Cooper (April 27, 2019). "Every Character in Avengers: Endgame". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 Baumgartner, Scott (March 31, 2019). "Winston Duke on How 'Avengers' Will Top Itself with 'Endgame'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on April 1, 2019. Retrieved April 1, 2019.
 Allen, Ben (April 25, 2019). "All of the cameos in Avengers: Endgame". Radio Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 Dillon, Niamh (April 26, 2019). "Tipperary actress Kerry Condon lends her voice to new Avengers: Endgame blockbuster". The Nationalist. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 Avila, Mike (October 9, 2016). "Watch: Evangeline Lilly on introducing the Wasp, when she'll join The Avengers". Blastr. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016. Retrieved October 9, 2016.
 "Avengers: Endgame – Press Kit" (PDF). WDSMediaFile.com. Walt Disney Studios. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved May 23, 2019.
 McMillan, Graeme (October 25, 2018). "'Avengers 4' Will Feature Flashbacks, Says Actor Frank Grillo". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 26, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 "Robert Downey Jr. Reveals Kraglin's Unseen Appearance in New Avengers: Endgame Photo". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved May 12, 2019.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 26, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame explained: Does Natalie Portman's Jane Foster return?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 Baysinger, Tim (April 26, 2019). "It's Finally All Connected: How 'Avengers: Endgame' Finally Acknowledged the MCU's TV Universe". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 Petski, Denise (September 15, 2017). "'Westworld': Hiroyuki Sanada Set To Recur in Season 2 of HBO Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 16, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2017.
 Florio, Angelica (April 24, 2019). "Who Is Akihiko In 'Avengers: Endgame'? Hiroyuki Sanada's Mysterious Marvel Character Is Totally New To The MCU". Bustle. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019.
 Kitchener, Shaun (April 25, 2019). "Avengers Endgame spoilers: Morgan Stark shock – Tony's daughter is very different to comic". Daily Express. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 Chitwood, Adam (May 6, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame': Here's Why Katherine Langford's Big Scene Was Cut". Collider. Archived from the original on May 6, 2019. Retrieved May 6, 2019.
 Bradley, Laura (May 6, 2019). "Why Avengers: Endgame and the Russos Cut Katherine Langford's Role". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2019.
 "Emma Fuhrmann joins 'Avengers 4' as Ant-Man's teenage daughter". Cinema.com. April 19, 2018. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019 – via Yahoo.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 26, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame explained: Stan Lee's final cameo". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (April 25, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Directors Joe & Anthony Russo Address Inclusion Of First Openly Gay Character In Marvel Superhero Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 27, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame explained: Cameos from Thanos creator, 'Community' stars, and more". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 Dominguez, Noah (May 9, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame: Joe Russo Explains the Movie's 'Hidden' Cameo". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 16, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2019.
 Strom, Marc (October 28, 2014). "Marvel's The Avengers Head into an Infinity War". Marvel Comics. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Siegel, Lucas (October 28, 2014). "Marvel Announces Black Panther, Captain Marvel, Inhumans, Avengers: Infinity War Films, Cap & Thor 3 Subtitles". Newsarama. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Strom, Marc (April 7, 2015). "Joe & Anthony Russo to Direct 2-Part Marvel's 'Avengers: Infinity War' Event". Marvel Comics. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015.
 Kit, Borys; Siegemund-Broka, Austin (March 23, 2015). "Russo Brothers to Direct 'Avengers: Infinity War' Parts 1 and 2". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 23, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015.
 Zalben, Alex; Horowitz, Josh (April 12, 2015). "Marvel's Movie Future: Here's Everything You Need To Know Through... Phase 4?". MTV. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015.
 Strom, Mark (May 7, 2015). "Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely to Write Marvel's 2-Part 'Avengers: Infinity War' Event". Marvel Comics. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Ryan, Mike (May 4, 2016). "Russo Brothers Confirm: 'Avengers: Infinity War 1 And 2' Will Be Retitled". Uproxx. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016.
 McNary, Dave (July 29, 2018). "Marvel's 'Avengers: Infinity War' Will be One Movie, Not Two". Variety. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved October 27, 2018.
 Eisenberg, Eric (April 23, 2017). "Why Avengers 4 Doesn't Have A Title Yet, According To Kevin Feige". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on April 24, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
 Sandwell, Ian (March 21, 2018). "Here's why we won't get Avengers 4's title until after Infinity War". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2018.
 Perry, Spencer (August 10, 2017). "Avengers 4 Filming Has Begun!". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved August 10, 2017.
 Marc, Christopher (June 14, 2017). "'Avengers 4' aka 'Mary Lou 2' Shoots July–December in Atlanta". Omega Underground. Archived from the original on June 17, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017.
 Cabin, Chris (January 14, 2016). "'Captain America: Civil War' Directors on Landing Spider-Man, 'Infinity War' Shooting Schedule". Collider. Archived from the original on January 17, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2016.
 Melrose, Kevin (July 14, 2017). "Avengers: Infinity War Appears to Have Wrapped Filming". CBR. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017.
 Vlessing, Etan (May 7, 2015). "Marvel's 'Avengers: Infinity War' to be Shot Entirely With Imax/Arri 2D Camera". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Walljasper, Matt (August 24, 2017). "What's filming in Atlanta now? Avengers: Infinity War, Ant-Man and the Wasp, Valor, Uncle Drew, plus the Marvel film that got away". Atlanta. Archived from the original on August 26, 2017. Retrieved August 26, 2017.
 Chitwood, Adam (April 21, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' and 'Avengers 4' Are Being Shot Separately, Says Kevin Feige". Collider. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Retrieved April 21, 2017.
 Pape, Stefan (April 27, 2016). "Exclusive Interview: The Russo Brothers address the possibility of a new Captain America after Avengers: Infinity War". HeyUGuys. Archived from the original on April 27, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016.
 Lussier, Germain (August 12, 2019). "All of the Coolest Trivia Revealed on the Avengers: Endgame Blu-ray". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved September 26, 2019.
 Connor, Rachel (April 29, 2017). "Durham Cathedral transformed for filming of Marvel's Avenger: Infinity War". The Northern Echo. Archived from the original on April 30, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2017.
 Trumbore, Dave (January 11, 2018). "'Avengers 4' Wraps Filming as the Russo Brothers Move into Post-Production". Collider. Archived from the original on January 12, 2018. Retrieved January 11, 2018.
 Barry, John W. (December 17, 2018). "'Avengers: Endgame' films along Hudson River in Dutchess". Poughkeepsie Journal. Archived from the original on December 18, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018.
 Dumaraog, Ana (September 7, 2018). "Avengers 4 Reshoots Officially Begin As Directors Post Set Photo". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 8, 2018. Retrieved September 8, 2018.
 Hood, Cooper (October 12, 2018). "Avengers 4 Reshoots: Russo Brothers Announce Filming Has Wrapped". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 13, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2018.
 Dominguez, Noah (January 16, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Reshoots Bring Back Two Guardians of the Galaxy". CBR. Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019.
 "St Abbs 'twinned' with Avengers village". BBC News. May 6, 2019. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2019.
 Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (October 11, 2018). "Scarlett Johansson Lands $15 Million Payday for Black Widow Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
 Truitt, Brian (December 7, 2018). "It's finally here! Watch the first trailer for Marvel's newly titled 'Avengers: Endgame'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
 Frei, Vincent (December 7, 2018). "Avengers: Endgame". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on March 26, 2019. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
 Giardina, Carloyn (July 29, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Contains 200 Aging and De-Aging VFX Shots". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019.
 Jones, Nate (April 30, 2019). "Who Is in Avengers: Endgame the Least?". New York. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019.
 "'Avengers: Endgame' VFX Supervisor Reveals Secrets to Aging, De-Aging Characters in 'Behind the Screen' Podcast". The Hollywood Reporter. May 18, 2019. Archived from the original on May 18, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2019.
 Hullfish, Steve (April 29, 2018). "Art of the Cut with Avengers – Infinity War editor, Jeffrey Ford, ACE". Pro Video Coalition. Archived from the original on December 23, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 Burlingame, Russ (June 6, 2016). "Avengers Composer Alan Silvestri To Return For Infinity War". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 8, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2016.
 McMillan, Graeme (November 8, 2018). "'Avengers 4' Runtime Is Currently 3 Hours". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 9, 2018. Retrieved November 28, 2018.
 Davis, Brandon (March 22, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Score Officially Complete". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 23, 2019. Retrieved March 26, 2019.
 "'Avengers: Endgame' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. April 25, 2019. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 Dinh, Christine (June 13, 2019). "Watch the Music Video for Alan Silvestri's 'Portals' Off the 'Avengers: Endgame' Soundtrack". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 17, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 Burton, Byron (April 26, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Composer on Finding a Poignant Ending for the Journey". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 Burwick, Kevin (April 27, 2019). "Why the Avengers: Endgame Opening Song Is Perfect". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 Robinson, Joanna (April 25, 2019). "Avengers: The Hidden Meaning Behind That Final Endgame Song". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 17, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' $200M+ Promo Campaign Is Marvel's Biggest Ever, Surpassing 'Infinity War' & More". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019.
 Markovich, Tony (December 4, 2018). "Audi E-Tron GT Concept confirmed for 'Avengers 4'". Autoblog.com. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 11, 2018.
 Lussier, Germain (May 7, 2018). "The Sequel to Spider-Man Homecoming Spans the Globe". io9. Archived from the original on May 7, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Lussier, Germain (June 26, 2018). "The Avengers 4 Trailers Are Going To Have A Weird Marketing Problem". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018.
 Ritman, Alex (June 13, 2018). "CineEurope: Disney Offers Glimpses of 'Toy Story 4,' 'Avengers 4,' 'Wreck-It Ralph 2'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 14, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2018.
 Whitbrook, James (June 15, 2018). "Don't Believe the Ridiculous Avengers 4 Rumors Floating Around Right Now". io9. Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018.
 Chitwood, Adam (June 25, 2018). "'Avengers 4' Title Likely Won't Be Revealed Until the end of the Year, Says Kevin Feige". Collider. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018.
 McMillan, Graeme (December 4, 2018). "What 'Avengers 4' Trailer Fever Should Teach Marvel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 6, 2018.
 Newby, Richard (December 7, 2018). "The Tragic Symmetry of 'Avengers: Endgame'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
 Sandoval, Dustin [@DustinMSandoval] (December 7, 2018). "It's probably gone unnoticed[....]" (Tweet). Archived from the original on December 10, 2018. Retrieved December 10, 2018 – via Twitter.
 Goslin, Austen (December 7, 2018). "Avengers: Endgame's title ties together a long-running Avengers theme". Polygon. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 10, 2018.
 Spangler, Todd (December 8, 2018). "'Avengers: Endgame' Trailer Smashes 24-Hour Video Views Record". Variety. Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved December 8, 2018.
 Rifkin, Jesse (January 3, 2019). "Trailer Impact: 'Lego Movie 2' Posts Highest Recall w/ 24.7%; 'Avengers: Endgame' Posts Near-Record Interest in a Cinema View at 78.1%". BoxOffice. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 3, 2019.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 14, 2019). "Marvel updates Avengers: Endgame poster to include Danai Gurira's name". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 18, 2019. Retrieved March 14, 2019.
 Martinez, Jose (March 17, 2019). "Latest 'Avengers: Endgame' Trailer Becomes Second-Most Watched Trailer Ever in First 24 Hours". Complex. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved March 20, 2019.
 Ridgely, Charlie (April 15, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Being Called "One of the Biggest Movies of Our Lifetime," Theater Chains Adding Additional Showtimes". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2019.
 Giardina, Carolyn (April 23, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Premiere: Disney, Dolby Build High-Tech Theater in LA Convention Center". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (March 28, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' China Release Set On April 24; $800M+ WW Opening In Sight?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019.
 Merueñas, Mark (March 16, 2019). "Pinoys among those who get to watch 'Avengers: Endgame' two days ahead of rest of the world". GMA News Onlin. MSN. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2019.
 Knight, Lewis (April 17, 2019). "Avengers Endgame: UK release date, trailer, run time, cast and latest news". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on May 2, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (April 22, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame': Is A $1B Global Opening Even Possible? If So, Here's How It Would Go Down – B.O. Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2019.
 Lieberman, David (February 22, 2017). "Disney Films To Show on Imax Through 2019 With New Distribution Deal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017.
 Kroll, Justin (September 12, 2017). "'Star Wars: Episode IX' Release Date Moves to December 2019". Variety. Archived from the original on September 12, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017.
 Премьеру "Мстителей" перенесли из-за российского фильма. svoboda.org (in Russian). Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. April 23, 2019. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2019.
 Trumbore, Dave (May 1, 2018). "MCU Timeline Explained: From Infinity Stones to Infinity War and Beyond". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
 Alexander, Julia (May 10, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame gets Spider-Man: Far From Home trailer as a post-credits scene". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 10, 2019. Retrieved May 11, 2019.
 Ridgely, Charlie (June 19, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Officially Getting Re-Released With New Footage (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2019.
 Yehl, Joshua (June 19, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Re-Release Runtime, Release Date, Tribute Subject Revealed". IGN. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019.
 Chitwood, Adam (June 26, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Digital and Blu-ray Release Date, Details, and Trailer Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2019.
 Mehmedova, Filiz (June 26, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame's emotional Iron Man moment featured in new trailer". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 29, 2019.
 Goldberg, Matt (November 6, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Will Debut on Disney+ Earlier Than Expected". Collider. Archived from the original on November 6, 2019. Retrieved November 6, 2019.
 Archer, John (June 26, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' 4K Blu-ray Set To Frustrate AV Fans". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved August 14, 2019.
 Weiss, Josh (September 6, 2019). "Italy erects Iron Man statue to honor Tony Stark's noble death in Avengers: Endgame". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on October 8, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019.
 McClintock, Pamela (July 20, 2019). "Box Office: 'Avengers: Endgame' Passes 'Avatar' to Become No. 1 Film of All Time". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Travis Clark (July 22, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' dethroned 'Avatar' at the box office, but it would have to make billions more to beat the actual biggest movie of all time". Business Insider. Retrieved January 22, 2020.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (April 28, 2019). "Oh, Snap! 'Avengers: Endgame' Crushes $1.2B+ Global & $859M Overseas Record Bows; Propels MCU Pics To $20B WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 29, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 28, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame' Rests At $357M+ Opening Record; Eyes $33M+ Monday & Record $180M 2nd Frame; Weekend Biz Hits $401M+ High". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 27, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' To Near Rare Breakeven Point With $1.1B Global Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 24, 2020). "'Avengers: Endgame' Is No. 1 In Deadline's 2019 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament; How Its Billion-Dollar Opening Rocked Exhibition And Generated A $900M Profit". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2020.
 Rubin, Rebecca (May 5, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Crushes $2 Billion Milestone in Record Time". Variety. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 6, 2019.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 5, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Passes 'Titanic' To Become #2 Film Ever Worldwide With $2.189B – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019.
 Barnhardt, Adam (May 14, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Inches Closer to $2.5 Billion Worldwide in Pursuit of Avatar Record". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on May 16, 2019. Retrieved June 4, 2019.
 McNary, Dave (December 28, 2018). "'Avengers: Endgame,' 'Captain Marvel' Among Fandango and IMDb's Most Anticipated Movies of 2019". Variety. Archived from the original on January 3, 2019. Retrieved January 2, 2019.
 Hayes, Dade (December 31, 2018). "'Avengers: Endgame,' 'Captain Marvel' Rated By Atom Tickets As Most Anticipated 2019 Film Releases". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 1, 2019. Retrieved January 2, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 2, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Presales Set First-Hour Records; Ticket Sites Crash – CinemaCon". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
 "Marvel Studios' Avengers: Endgame advance ticket sales outpacing Avengers: Infinity War" (Press release). Regal Cinemas. PR Newswire. April 2, 2019. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019. Within eight hours of going on sale, Avengers: Endgame has doubled all the first week sales for Avengers: Infinity War.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 25, 2019). "More Proof That 'Avengers: Endgame' Is Headed Toward A Record Opening: Marvel Pic Is Fandango's Biggest Preseller Of All-Time". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019.
 Pedersen, Erik (April 12, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' China Presales Blast Off To Unprecedented Levels". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2019.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (April 24, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Blasts Into China With $107M+ Record Opening Day". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2019.
 Rubin, Rebecca (April 4, 2019). "Box Office: Avengers: Endgame Headed for Epic $200–$250 Million Domestic Launch". Variety. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved April 4, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 4, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' U.S. Opening Weekend Projections: Can Sequel Get Close To $300M?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved April 4, 2019.
 McClintock, Pamela (April 23, 2019). "Box Office Preview: 'Avengers: Endgame' Preps for Record $850M-$900M Global Bow". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved May 4, 2019.
 Galuppo, Mia (April 30, 2019). "Box Office: 'Avengers: Endgame' Scores $36.7M Monday". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 1, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' $33M+ Tuesday Is Best For Disney MCU". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 5, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Mows Down 'Long Shot', 'Intruder' & 'UglyDolls' With $145M+ Second Weekend, Crosses $600M In Record Time". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 12, 2019). "'Pokemon Detective Pikachu' Grabs $58M In 'Endgame' Dominated Universe; Marvel Pic 3rd Highest Domestic With $724M+ – Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 12, 2019. Retrieved May 12, 2019.
 Anthony D'Alessandro (May 19, 2019). "'John Wick: Chapter 3' Takes Out 'Avengers' With $56M+ Opening, But 'Endgame' Bests 'Avatar' As 2nd Highest Grossing Pic Ever At Domestic B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2019.
 Anthony D'Alessandro (May 28, 2019). "'Aladdin's $116M-$117M Opening Reps A Whole New World For Disney at Memorial Day B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 30, 2019). "'Toy Story 4' Holds Down No. 1 With $58M+ Before 'Spider-Man' Swoops In, 'Annabelle 3' Stabs 31M+ 5-Day, 'Yesterday' $17M+ – Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved June 30, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 22, 2019). "Disney's Busy Weekend: 'Lion King' Rips Up July Record With $192M Following Marvel Slate Announcement, 'Endgame' Notching All-Time $2.8B B.O. Record". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 4, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019.
 Rubin, Rebecca (April 23, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Expected to Shatter Box Office Records". Variety. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019.
 "Avengers: Endgame sets new box office record in Vietnam – VnExpress International". VnExpress International. Archived from the original on May 10, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2019.
 "Мстители: Финал" (in Russian). Ekinobilet.fond-kino.ru. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
 "Финальная часть "Мстителей" собрала в прокате миллиард рублей за три дня". РБК. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 2, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Overtakes 'Force Awakens' & 'Furious 7' Overseas with $1.2B+; Globally Now #6 Pic Ever At $1.66B+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2019.
 "Headlines from China: 'Avengers: Endgame' Is Now the Highest-grossing Foreign Film in China". China Film Insider. May 1, 2019. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
 "'Avengers: Endgame' Becomes Top Hollywood Release Ever in India". The Hollywood Reporter. May 3, 2019. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2019.
 Williams, Taylor (April 23, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Reviews Call It a Fitting End to the Infinity Saga". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019.
 Avengers: Endgame at Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 14, 2020.
 "Avengers: Endgame Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 30, 2019. Retrieved June 30, 2019.
 Weldon, Glen (April 24, 2019). "Mourning Has Broken Them: 'Avengers: Endgame'". NPR. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019.
 Travers, Peter (April 24, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Review: The MCU's Long Goodbye Is an Emotional Wipeout". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019.
 Deburge, Peter (April 23, 2019). "Film Review: 'Avengers: Endgame'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2019.
 "'Avengers: Endgame' Satisfies on Every Level". PopMatters. April 24, 2019. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved April 29, 2019.
 McCarthy, Todd (April 23, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2019.
 Roeper, Richard (April 24, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame': Three hours of action and emotion, and worth every second". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2019.
 Scott, A.O. (April 23, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame' Review: The Real Heroes Were the Friends We Made Along the Way". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019.
 Chang, Justin (April 23, 2019). "Review: 'Avengers: Endgame' brings the Marvel saga to a thrilling, time-twisting conclusion — for now". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2019.
 Tallerico, Brian (April 24, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Movie Review (2019)". RogerEbert.com. Ebert Digital LLC. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2019.
 Seitz, Matt Zoller (April 29, 2019). "Avengers, MCU, Game of Thrones, and the Content Endgame". RogerEbert.com. Ebert Digital LLC. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2019.
 Morgenstern, Joe (April 25, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Review: A Marvelous Wrap". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2019.
 Brody, Richard (April 26, 2019). "Review: What "Avengers: Endgame" Could Have Been". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 Lane, Anthony (April 26, 2019). ""The White Crow" and "Avengers: Endgame," Reviewed". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved June 4, 2019.
 "Oscar Nominations 2020: The Complete List". Variety. January 13, 2020. Archived from the original on January 15, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020.
 "'Klaus' Wins Big at Annie Awards for Animation". The Hollywood Reporter. January 25, 2020. Archived from the original on January 26, 2020. Retrieved January 26, 2020.
 Clarke, Stewart (January 7, 2020). "'Joker,' 'Once Upon a Time in Hollywood,' 'The Irishman' Lead 2020 BAFTA Film Award Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on January 9, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2019.
 Jackson, Angelique (January 12, 2020). "Critics' Choice Awards: The Complete Winners List". Variety. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020.
 "Grammy Awards Nominations: Complete List". Variety. November 20, 2019. Archived from the original on September 4, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2019.
 Feinberg, Scott (October 17, 2019). "Hollywood Film Awards: 'Avengers: Endgame,' Pharrell Set for Honors". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019.
 Nickolai, Nate (June 17, 2019). "MTV Movie & TV Awards Winners: The Complete List". Variety. Archived from the original on June 18, 2019. Retrieved June 17, 2019.
 Nordyke, Kimberly; Howard, Annie (November 10, 2019). "People's Choice Awards: 'Avengers: Endgame' Named Best Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 11, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019.
 "2019 Nominees". International Press Academy. Archived from the original on December 3, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019.
 Anderton, Ethan (September 14, 2019). "2019 Saturn Awards Winners: 'Avengers: Endgame' Dominates with Six Total Awards". /Film. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved December 21, 2019.
 Ridgely, Charlie (December 11, 2019). "Joker, Watchmen, Avengers: Endgame Score SAG Award Nominations". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019.
 Clarendon, Dan (August 11, 2019). "Teen Choice Awards 2019: Complete List of Winners and Nominees". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 11, 2019.
 Couch, Aaron (May 8, 2018). "Disney's Bob Iger Won't Rule Out More Avengers After 'Avengers 4'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 10, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019.
 Russell, Bradley (April 25, 2019). "Exclusive: The Russos say they're done with the MCU for the foreseeable future after Avengers: Endgame". GamesRadar+. Future Publishing. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
External links
Avengers: Endgame
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Data from Wikidata
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
Avengers: Endgame on IMDb Edit this at Wikidata
Avengers: Endgame at the Encyclopædia Britannica
Script
Avengers: Endgame
Video-x-generic.svgFilm portalFlag of the United States.svgUnited States portalDragon-149393.svgSpeculative fiction portal
Categories: 2019 filmsEnglish-language films2010s science fiction action films2010s superhero films2019 3D filmsAlien invasions in filmsAlternate timeline filmsAmerican 3D filmsAmerican filmsAmerican science fiction action filmsAmerican science fiction war filmsAmerican sequel filmsAvengers (film series)Crossover filmsFilms about extraterrestrial lifeFilms about quantum mechanicsFilms about size changeFilms about time travelFilms directed by Anthony and Joe RussoFilms featuring anthropomorphic charactersFilms scored by Alan SilvestriFilms set in 1970Films set in 2012Films set in 2013Films set in 2014Films set in 2018Films set in 2023Films set in New JerseyFilms set in New York (state)Films set in New York CityFilms set in NorwayFilms set in San FranciscoFilms set in TokyoFilms set in WakandaFilms set in AfricaFilms set in the 1940sFilms set on fictional planetsFilms shot at Pinewood Atlanta StudiosFilms shot in AtlantaFilms shot in County DurhamFilms shot in New York (state)Films shot in ScotlandFilms using computer-generated imageryFilms with screenplays by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeelyIMAX filmsIntergalactic travel in fictionMarvel Cinematic Universe filmsMotion capture in filmNanotechnology in fictionPost-apocalyptic films
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
Русский
हिन्दी
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Español
中文
فارسی
اردو
العربية
Română
58 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 14 July 2020, at 06:03 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Click here for more information.  Page semi-protected
Avengers: Age of Ultron
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Not to be confused with Age of Ultron.
Avengers: Age of Ultron
Avengers Age of Ultron poster.jpg
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Joss Whedon
Produced by	Kevin Feige
Written by	Joss Whedon
Based on	
The Avengers
by Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
Starring	
Robert Downey Jr.
Chris Hemsworth
Mark Ruffalo
Chris Evans
Scarlett Johansson
Jeremy Renner
Don Cheadle
Aaron Taylor-Johnson
Elizabeth Olsen
Paul Bettany
Cobie Smulders
Anthony Mackie
Hayley Atwell
Idris Elba
Stellan Skarsgård
James Spader
Samuel L. Jackson
Music by	
Brian Tyler
Danny Elfman
Cinematography	Ben Davis
Edited by	
Jeffrey Ford
Lisa Lassek
Production
company
Marvel Studios
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release date
April 13, 2015 (Dolby Theatre)
May 1, 2015 (United States)
Running time
141 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	
$444–495.2 million (gross)[2][3]
$365.5 million (net)[2]
Box office	$1.403 billion[4]
Avengers: Age of Ultron is a 2015 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team the Avengers, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. It is the sequel to The Avengers (2012) and the 11th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was written and directed by Joss Whedon and features an ensemble cast that includes Robert Downey Jr., Chris Hemsworth, Mark Ruffalo, Chris Evans, Scarlett Johansson, Jeremy Renner, Don Cheadle, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Elizabeth Olsen, Paul Bettany, Cobie Smulders, Anthony Mackie, Hayley Atwell, Idris Elba, Stellan Skarsgård, James Spader, and Samuel L. Jackson. In the film, the Avengers fight Ultron, an artificial intelligence obsessed with causing human extinction.

The sequel was announced in May 2012 after the successful release of The Avengers, with Whedon set to return as writer and director in August. Whedon updated Ultron's origin for the film to involve the MCU's Avengers team, and introduced the characters Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch who Marvel shared the rights to with 20th Century Fox. Casting began in June 2013 with the re-signing of Downey. Second unit filming began in February 2014 in South Africa with principal photography taking place between March and August, primarily at Shepperton Studios in Surrey, England. Additional footage was filmed in Italy, South Korea, Bangladesh, New York City, and around England. With an estimated net production budget of $365 million, it is the second most expensive film ever made.

Avengers: Age of Ultron premiered in Los Angeles on April 13, 2015, and was released in the United States on May 1, 2015, as part of Phase Two of the MCU. The film received generally positive reviews from critics and grossed over $1.4 billion worldwide, becoming the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2015 as well as the fifth-highest-grossing film of all time. Two sequels, Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame, were released in April 2018 and April 2019, respectively.


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
3.1	Development
3.2	Pre-production
3.3	Filming
3.4	Post-production
4	Music
5	Marketing
5.1	Promotion
5.2	Merchandise
6	Release
6.1	Theatrical
6.2	Home media
7	Reception
7.1	Box office
7.2	Critical response
7.3	Accolades
8	Sequels
9	Notes
10	See also
11	References
12	External links
Plot
In the Eastern European country of Sokovia, the Avengers—Tony Stark, Steve Rogers, Thor, Bruce Banner, Natasha Romanoff, and Clint Barton—raid a Hydra facility commanded by Baron Wolfgang von Strucker, who has been experimenting on humans using the scepter previously wielded by Loki. They encounter two of Strucker's test subjects—twins Pietro, who has superhuman speed, and Wanda Maximoff, who has telepathic and telekinetic abilities—and apprehend Strucker, while Stark retrieves Loki's scepter.

Stark and Banner discover an artificial intelligence within the scepter's gem, and secretly decide to use it to complete Stark's "Ultron" global defense program. The unexpectedly sentient Ultron, believing he must eradicate humanity to save Earth, eliminates Stark's A.I. J.A.R.V.I.S. and attacks the Avengers at their headquarters. Escaping with the scepter, Ultron uses the resources in Strucker's Sokovia base to upgrade his rudimentary body and build an army of robot drones. Having killed Strucker, he recruits the Maximoffs, who hold Stark responsible for their parents' deaths by his company's weapons, and goes to the base of arms dealer Ulysses Klaue in Johannesburg to obtain Wakandan vibranium. The Avengers attack Ultron and the Maximoffs, but Wanda subdues them with haunting visions, causing Banner to turn into the Hulk and rampage until Stark stops him with his anti-Hulk armor.[N 1]

A worldwide backlash over the resulting destruction, and the fears Wanda's hallucinations incited, send the team into hiding at a safe house. Thor departs to consult with Dr. Erik Selvig on the apocalyptic future he saw in his hallucination, while Nick Fury arrives and encourages the team to form a plan to stop Ultron. In Seoul, Ultron uses Loki's scepter to enslave the team's friend Dr. Helen Cho. They use her synthetic-tissue technology, vibranium, and the scepter's gem to craft a new body. As Ultron uploads himself into the body, Wanda is able to read his mind; discovering his plan for human extinction, the Maximoffs turn against Ultron. Rogers, Romanoff, and Barton find Ultron and retrieve the synthetic body, but Ultron captures Romanoff.

The Avengers fight amongst themselves when Stark and Banner secretly upload J.A.R.V.I.S.—who is still operational after hiding from Ultron inside the Internet—into the synthetic body. Thor returns to help activate the body, explaining based on his vision that the gem on its brow is the Mind Stone, one of the six Infinity Stones, the most powerful objects in existence. This "Vision" and the Maximoffs accompany the Avengers to Sokovia, where Ultron has used the remaining vibranium to build a machine to lift a large part of the capital city skyward, intending to crash it into the ground to cause global extinction. Banner rescues Romanoff, who awakens the Hulk for the battle. The Avengers fight Ultron's army while Fury arrives in a Helicarrier with Maria Hill, James Rhodes and S.H.I.E.L.D. agents to evacuate civilians. Pietro dies when he shields Barton from gunfire, and a vengeful Wanda abandons her post to destroy Ultron's primary body, which allows one of his drones to activate the machine. The city plummets, but Stark and Thor overload the machine and shatter the landmass. In the aftermath, the Hulk, unwilling to endanger Romanoff by being with her, departs in a Quinjet, while Vision confronts and seemingly destroys Ultron's last remaining body.

Later, with the Avengers having established a new base run by Fury, Hill, Cho, and Selvig, Thor returns to Asgard to learn more about the forces he suspects have manipulated recent events. As Stark leaves and Barton retires, Rogers and Romanoff prepare to train new Avengers: Rhodes, Vision, Sam Wilson, and Wanda.

In a mid-credits scene, Thanos, dissatisfied by the failures of his pawns, dons a gauntlet[N 2] and vows to retrieve the Infinity Stones himself.

Cast

The cast of Avengers: Age of Ultron at the 2014 San Diego Comic-Con
Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man: 
The benefactor of the Avengers[9][10][11] who is a self-described genius, billionaire, playboy, and philanthropist with electromechanical suits of armor of his own invention.[12] On how his character evolves after the events of Iron Man 3, Downey said, "I think he realizes that tweaking and making all the suits in the world—which is what he has been doing—still didn't work for that thing of his tour of duty that left him a little PTSD. So his focus is more on how can we make it so that there's no problem to begin with. That, you know, there's a bouncer at our planet's rope. That's the big idea."[13]
Chris Hemsworth as Thor: 
An Avenger and the crown prince of Asgard, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name.[14] Regarding Thor's place in the film, Hemsworth stated that as Thor has remained on Earth since Thor: The Dark World, and has begun to feel at home here, he considers Ultron's threat a personal attack.[15] Hemsworth stated that he had to work harder to bring new elements to the character to avoid repeating himself saying, "It gave us room to kind of make him a little more grounded and human and have him in some civilian clothes and mixing it up at a party."[16] Hemsworth noted that Thor's motivations in this film were completely different, as it was the first MCU film where he did not play against Tom Hiddleston's character of Loki.[11]
Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner / Hulk: 
An Avenger and genius scientist who, because of exposure to gamma radiation, transforms into a monster when enraged or agitated.[17] To prepare for the role, Ruffalo worked with motion capture performer Andy Serkis' The Imaginarium.[18] He stated that his character had grown since the previous film and was "a bit more complex".[19] Ruffalo explained that a confrontation is brewing between Banner and the Hulk saying, "There's a very cool thing happening: Hulk is as afraid of Banner as Banner is afraid of Hulk.. and they have got to come to peace somehow with each other."[20] While filming in London, Ruffalo said that Whedon still had not given him any of the Hulk's lines.[21] Whedon later explained that he writes the Hulk's dialogue spontaneously, saying, "What makes the Hulk so hard to write is that you're pretending he's a werewolf when he's a superhero. You want it vice versa... So the question is, how has he progressed? How can we bring changes on what the Hulk does? And that's not just in the screenplay, that's moment to moment."[22]
Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America: 
The leader of the Avengers[9][11] and a World War II veteran who was enhanced to the peak of human physicality by an experimental serum and frozen in suspended animation before waking up in the modern world.[23][24] Evans stated that since the fall of S.H.I.E.L.D. in Captain America: The Winter Soldier, Rogers has been left to depend on his Avenger teammates without the structure of military life and is now "looking to understand where he belongs, not just as a soldier, as Captain America, but as Steve Rogers, as a person."[16] Evans said that he was able to maintain the strength he built up for Captain America: The Winter Soldier by working out up to an hour a day.[25] Regarding Captain America's fighting style, Evans felt he did not want to take a step back from the skills shown in The Winter Soldier, making sure Rogers' fight style advanced, showing "a consistent display of strength" and having Rogers utilizing his environment.[26]
Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow: 
An Avenger who formerly worked for S.H.I.E.L.D. as a highly trained spy.[27] Producer Kevin Feige stated that more of the character's backstory is explored in the film.[28] Johansson elaborated, "In Avengers 2 we go back... we definitely learn more about Widow's backstory, and we get to find out how she became the person you see. All of these characters have deep, dark pasts, and I think that the past catches up to some of us a little bit."[29] Regarding where the film picks up Widow's story, Johansson felt it was a continuation of what was seen for her character in The Winter Soldier, with the fact that "'[Widow] never made an active choice. [She's] a product of other people's imposition.' That's going to catch up with her. That's bound to have a huge effect. There's got to be a result of that realization... You'll see her actively making some choices in her life, for better or worse."[30] A mixture of close-ups, concealing costumes, stunt doubles and visual effects were used to help hide Johansson's pregnancy during filming.[31]
Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye: 
An Avenger and master archer who previously worked as an agent for S.H.I.E.L.D.[32] Whedon said that Hawkeye interacts more with the other characters in the film, as opposed to the first film where the character had been "possessed pretty early by a bad guy and had to walk around all scowly."[33] As the character did not appear in any other of Marvel's Phase Two films, Whedon stated Age of Ultron sheds light on to what the character was doing since the end of The Avengers.[22] Renner described the character as "kind of a loner" and "a team player only 'cause he sort of has to be. He's not really a company man. Captain America can be that guy. In [Age of Ultron] you'll understand why [Hawkeye] thinks the way he thinks."[26]
Don Cheadle as James "Rhodey" Rhodes / War Machine: An officer in the U.S. Air Force and Tony Stark's close personal friend who operates the War Machine armor.[34][35]
Aaron Taylor-Johnson as Pietro Maximoff / Quicksilver: 
The twin brother of Scarlet Witch who can move at superhuman speed.[36] Taylor-Johnson felt Pietro was defined by the fact that he and his sister were abandoned by their family, and they both had to grow up "in Eastern Europe defending and looking out for themselves and each other," that they both look to the other for guidance. Taylor-Johnson also said that Quicksilver was "very overprotective" of Scarlet Witch and has "real anger frustration", which results in him being easily bored because of a short attention span.[37] Feige stated exploring Quicksilver's relationship with his sister and his backstory growing up in Eastern Europe would help differentiate the character from Evan Peters' version in X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014).[38] Taylor-Johnson stated that the running style for Quicksilver went through multiple iterations, saying, "The running style we tested early on was just very one-dimensional and boring to look at, but if you try to do free running, like parkour, then that's very much Captain America's style... You have to find your own place in the stunt world."[11] Much of Taylor-Johnson's scenes were filmed outdoors to give "life" to his running, as opposed to running indoors in front of a green screen.[39]
Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch: 
The twin sister of Quicksilver who can engage in hypnosis and telekinesis.[36][40] Olsen felt Wanda was "overly stimulated" rather than "mentally insane" because "she has such a vast amount of knowledge that she's unable to learn how to control it. No one taught her how to control it properly... she can connect to this world and parallel worlds at the same time, and parallel times."[40] Describing her character's mind control powers, Olsen said that the character is able to do more than manipulating someone's mind, with Scarlet Witch able to "feel and see what they feel and see" by projecting visions that they have never seen. Olsen expanded saying, "What I love about her is that, in so many superhero films, emotions are kind of negated a bit, but for her everything that someone else could feel—like their weakest moments—she physically goes through that same experience with them, which is pretty cool."[41] Olsen drew on her relationship with her older brother and her sisters to prepare for the role,[40] as well as looking to the comics for inspiration.[11] Olsen revealed that Whedon was inspired by dancers as a way to visually represent how the character moves. As such, Olsen mostly trained with a dancer in lieu of traditional stunt training.[42] Olsen is signed for this film and another.[39]
Paul Bettany as J.A.R.V.I.S. and Vision: 
Bettany, who voiced J.A.R.V.I.S., Stark's A.I. companion in previous films, was cast again as the Vision,[43][44] an android created by Ultron.[45] Bettany stated that he was surprised when Whedon asked him if he wanted to be the Vision because once an actor has been cast as a particular character in the MCU, they usually are not cast as another.[46] On what intrigued him about the Vision, Bettany said, "The thing that appealed to me is that this sort of nascent creature being born, being both omnipotent and totally naive, the sort of danger of that and complex nature of a thing being born that is that powerful and that created in a second and the choices he makes morally are really complex and interesting. They've really managed to maintain all of that".[46] Bettany also stated that the Vision feels paternal and protective to a number of people in the film, particularly Scarlet Witch, and has the ability to change his density. Bettany did wire work for the part.[46] Whedon stated he wanted to include the Vision in a second Avengers film before he signed onto the first film.[22] Bettany's make-up, which consisted of a mix of face paint and prosthetics, took two hours to apply with make-up artists Jeremy Woodhead and Nik Williams citing the correct hue of the Vision's skin as the hardest thing to figure out.[47]
Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill: 
A former high-ranking S.H.I.E.L.D. agent who now works for Stark.[48][49][50] Describing Hill's situation in the film, Smulders said that after The Winter Soldier, Hill does not "really know who's a good guy and who's a bad guy and she's trying to figure out that throughout this film." She added, "She's not getting any sleep. She's doing all the work. She doesn't have the kind of manpower that she had in S.H.I.E.L.D.,"[51] instead working for Tony Stark at the Avenger's headquarters "trying to keep everything running as smoothly as possible... it's an entirely different vibe for her."[52]
Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon: 
A former pararescueman trained by the military in aerial combat using a specially designed wing pack and a friend of Steve Rogers.[53] Discussing the relationship between Wilson and Rogers, Mackie said that the two characters have a mutual "soldier respect", which is explored in the film and in Captain America: Civil War.[54] Feige said that it was decided to reshoot the final scene of the film to incorporate the new Falcon suit designed for Ant-Man, which was released after Age of Ultron, as Falcon was originally shot in his original suit from The Winter Soldier.[55] Mackie stated he did not realize Wilson had become an Avenger until he watched the film at the premiere, as he was only given the script for the scenes he worked on.[56]
Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter: A retired officer with the Strategic Scientific Reserve and co-founder of S.H.I.E.L.D. who is a former love interest of Steve Rogers.[57]
Idris Elba as Heimdall: The all-seeing, all-hearing Asgardian sentry of the Bifröst Bridge, based on the mythological deity of the same name.[58]
Stellan Skarsgård as Erik Selvig: 
An astrophysicist and friend of Thor.[59] Skarsgård said he was originally not supposed to appear in the film, but received a call because "they'd written a couple of scenes, and I went and did them," not knowing if the scenes would appear in the final cut of the film.[60]
James Spader as Ultron: 
An artificial intelligence repurposed by Tony Stark and Bruce Banner for a pilot peace program that is overwhelmed with a god complex and now desires to pacify the Earth by eradicating humanity.[45][61][62][63][64][65] Director Joss Whedon stated that Spader was his "first and only choice" for the role, because of his "hypnotic voice that can be eerily calm and compelling" while also being very human and humorous.[66] Feige clarified that Spader's face and body were motion captured "to create a whole performance... We did not hire James Spader to do a robot voice."[67] Extensive scans were taken of Spader's head and body in preparation for the role.[68] About the character Whedon said, "He's always trying to destroy the Avengers, goddamn it, he's got a bee in his bonnet. He's not a happy guy, which means he's an interesting guy. He's got pain. And the way that manifests is not going to be standard robot stuff."[69] Whedon added that Ultron is "not a creature of logic—he's a robot who's genuinely disturbed. We're finding out what makes him menacing and at the same time endearing and funny and strange and unexpected, and everything a robot never is."[70] Whedon compared Ultron to Frankenstein's monster, saying, "It's our new Frankenstein myth [...] We create something in our own image and the thing turns on us. It has that pain of 'Well, why was I made? I want to kill Daddy.'"[71] Spader called the character "self-absorbed" and added, "I think he sees the Avengers as being part of a problem, a more comprehensive problem in the world. He sees the world from a very strange, [biblical] point of view because he's brand new, he's very young... He's immature, and yet has knowledge of comprehensive, broad history and precedent, and he has created in a very short period of time a rather skewed worldview."[72] Spader elaborates, "He truly is an artificial intelligence with absolutely no censorship at all, no parameters really … he's got too much power, too much strength and speed and size, so he's a very dangerous child."[73]
Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury: 
The former director of S.H.I.E.L.D. who originally recruited the Avengers and continues to be a mentor and leader for the team.[64][74] Jackson described the role as a cameo, saying, "I'm just kind of passing by there ... Because, it's another one of those 'people who have powers fighting people who have powers'. That's why I didn't get to New York in The Avengers. There's not a lot I could do except shoot a gun."[75]
Thomas Kretschmann and Henry Goodman reprise their roles as Baron Wolfgang von Strucker and Dr. List,[76][77] Hydra leaders who specialize in human experimentation, advanced robotics, and artificial intelligence from Captain America: The Winter Soldier.[64] Linda Cardellini portrays Laura Barton, Hawkeye's wife;[78][79] Claudia Kim portrays Helen Cho, a world-renowned geneticist who helps the Avengers from her office in Seoul;[64][80] Andy Serkis portrays Ulysses Klaue, a South-African black-market arms dealer, smuggler and gangster who is a former acquaintance from Stark's weapons-dealing days;[35][64][81] and Julie Delpy appears as Madame B., who mentored Black Widow into becoming an assassin.[82] Kerry Condon voices the artificial intelligence F.R.I.D.A.Y., a replacement for J.A.R.V.I.S.,[83] while Spader also voices Stark's Iron Legion droids.[84] Josh Brolin makes an uncredited appearance during the mid-credits scene as Thanos, reprising his role from Guardians of the Galaxy.[85] Avengers co-creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance in the film as a military veteran who attends the Avengers' victory party.[86] Tom Hiddleston was to reprise his role of Loki, but his scenes did not make the theatrical cut of the film.[87]

Production
Development
"I have to make my movie assuming that people will only have seen the first one, or possibly not even seen the first one. I can't assume that everybody went to see Thor [The Dark World], Captain America [The Winter Soldier], and Iron Man [3] in-between. I have to go from one movie to the next and be true to what's happened, but not be slavish to it ... The model I'm always trying to build from, my guiding star, is The Godfather Part II where a ton has happened in-between and it's a very different movie [from The Godfather], but you don't need any information: it's there in the film."
—Joss Whedon, director of Avengers: Age of Ultron, on balancing the film's accessibility and continuity.[88]
In October 2011, Kevin Feige, president of Marvel Studios said the studio was beginning to look at their Phase Two films, which would start with Iron Man 3 and would culminate in a second Avengers film.[89] In March 2012, Joss Whedon, director of the first film, stated that he would want a sequel to be "smaller. More personal. More painful. By being the next thing that should happen to these characters, and not just a rehash of what seemed to work the first time. By having a theme that is completely fresh and organic to itself."[90] Despite the production of the film becoming increasingly wider in scope, Feige maintained that this was not their intention, always looking to see where the team wanted to take the characters, over how to make it bigger than The Avengers.[91]

At the premiere of The Avengers, Feige said the studio had an option for Whedon to return as director.[92] In May 2012, after the successful release of the first film, Disney CEO Bob Iger announced a sequel was in development.[93] Most of the film's cast members were under contract to potentially appear in the sequel; however, Robert Downey Jr. was not, as his four-picture deal with Marvel expired after Iron Man 3.[94]

At the 2012 San Diego Comic-Con International, Whedon said he was undecided about directing.[95] However, in August 2012, Iger announced that Whedon would return to write and direct the sequel and develop the Marvel television series, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., for ABC.[96] Later in the month, Disney set a May 1, 2015, release date.[97] When asked about his decision to return, Whedon said, "Avengers 2, it wasn't a tough decision. For a long time I thought, 'Well, it's just not going to happen.' Then when I actually started to consider it, it became so clear that I desperately wanted to say more about these characters, it would've been an easy no and it was a spectacularly easy yes. There was no wrestling."[98] Whedon said that they intended for the film's production to not be as rushed as the first one.[99]

In December 2012, Whedon stated that he had completed an outline for the film.[100] In February, at the 2013 Jameson Dublin International Film Festival, Whedon said that death would play a theme in the sequel,[101] and in March, he said that he looked to The Empire Strikes Back and The Godfather Part II as inspirations.[102]

Feige revealed that Captain Marvel, who starred in her own MCU film in 2019, appeared in an early draft of the screenplay, but was removed since the character had not yet been cast, saying, "It didn't feel like the time. We didn't want to introduce her fully formed flying in a costume before you knew who she was or how she came to be."[103] Whedon went so far as to shoot visual effects plates for Captain Marvel to fly into Avengers Headquarters at the end of the film; those shots were reused, however, for Scarlet Witch instead.[104] Feige also revealed that an early draft of the script had Hulk's Quinjet detected near Saturn at the end of the film, but it was finally decided to keep it Earth-based and leave his fate ambiguous in order to dispel rumors that a film based on the "Planet Hulk" comic storyline was in development, which Marvel Studios had no plans to adapt at the time. Marvel would later decide to adapt "Planet Hulk" for the film Thor: Ragnarok, in which the Hulk does end up leaving Earth.[105]

Pre-production
By April 2013, filming was scheduled to begin in early 2014 at Shepperton Studios in England.[106] At the Hollywood premiere of Iron Man 3, Whedon said that he had completed a draft of the script, started the storyboard process, and met with actors. Whedon also mentioned that he wrote with Downey in mind and included a "brother/sister act" from the comic books,[107] later confirming that he was referring to Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch.[108][109] Whedon explained his rationale for including the characters in the film saying, "their powers are very visually interesting. One of the problems I had on the first one was everybody basically had punchy powers … [Quicksilver]'s got super speed. [Scarlet Witch] can weave spells and a little telekinesis, get inside your head. There's good stuff that they can do that will help sort of keep it fresh,"[110] though cautioned he was not throwing in more characters for the sake of doing that.[70] Whedon stated that the twins allowed him to add more conflict: "They don't like America, and they don't like the Avengers… The Avengers are like a world power, and not everybody's on board with the Avengers coming in and starting fights, even in the name of justice. So you need that dissenting voice, and you need to understand it and sympathize with it."[39] Because Marvel Studios shared the film rights to Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch with 20th Century Fox and had to avoid conflict with Fox's X-Men films, Whedon introduced two important characters into the Marvel Cinematic Universe completely on his terms for the first time, which allowed him to connect their origin stories to the universe that they created and avoid the concept of mutants.[39] Whedon relished at the storytelling opportunities by introducing a character with telepathic powers, explaining, "it meant we could spend a little time inside the Avengers' heads—either their past or their impressions of what's going on, or their fears, or all of the above."[39] By May, Downey had entered negotiations to extend his contract with Marvel Studios and reprise his role as Iron Man in the film.[111] A month later, Downey signed on to return for the then-untitled Avengers sequel, as well as a third Avengers film.[12]


Whedon promoting the film at the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con
At the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con International, Whedon announced the film would be subtitled Age of Ultron.[112] Despite the subtitle, the film is not based on the 2013 comic book miniseries Age of Ultron. Feige explained that they simply liked the title Age of Ultron but the plot was taken from decades of Avengers story arcs.[113] Whedon added that Ultron's origin would differ from his comics roots, and that Hank Pym would not be involved with Ultron's creation. Whedon disclosed that Edgar Wright had rights to the character first through his inclusion in Ant-Man, which was already in development. He also thought that Ultron needed to be conceived through the Avengers and since they already had Tony Stark and Bruce Banner on the team, it would not make sense to bring in a third scientist.[114] Whedon also said the film would have a darker tone due to Ultron's involvement.[115][116]

The title of the film came as a surprise to many fans who were expecting Thanos, the mastermind behind the events of the first film, to be the main villain in the sequel, with Whedon saying, "Thanos was never meant to be the next villain. He's always been the overlord of villainy and darkness."[117] Commenting on finding the right balance between technology- and fantasy-based heroes in Avengers: Age of Ultron, Feige said "Iron Man is a very technological hero; his movies are always technologically based. The first Thor was all about introducing Asgard and Thor in that more fantastical realm into the more reality-based MCU… As we go into Ultron clearly he does come out of technology, but we're using all of our tools at our disposal that we've established so far as part of the MCU to build the storyline of Age of Ultron."[118]

Casting continued into August 2013, with the announcement that James Spader would play Ultron.[61] In November, Marvel confirmed that Elizabeth Olsen and Aaron Taylor-Johnson would play the Scarlet Witch and Quicksilver, respectively.[36] Taylor-Johnson had been in negotiations since as early as June,[119][120][121] while Olsen's potential involvement was first reported in August.[122][123] By the end of the year, Mark Ruffalo,[17] Chris Evans,[23] Samuel L. Jackson,[74] Chris Hemsworth,[14] Scarlett Johansson,[27] Jeremy Renner[32] and Cobie Smulders[48] were confirmed to be returning to their roles from the first film, and Don Cheadle, who portrayed James Rhodes in the Iron Man films, had committed to a part in the film.[34] In the early months of 2014, Thomas Kretschmann was cast as Baron Wolfgang von Strucker,[76] Claudia Kim was cast in an unspecified role,[124] and Paul Bettany, who voiced J.A.R.V.I.S. in previous MCU films, was cast as the Vision.[44] Whedon said "juggling" all the characters in the film was "a nightmare" explaining, "They're very disparate characters. The joy of the Avengers is they really don't belong in the same room. It's not like the X-Men, who are all tortured by the same thing and have similar costumes. These guys are just all over the place. And so it's tough. Honestly, this is as tough as anything I've ever done."[125]

On January 24, 2014, the Forte di Bard Association announced that filming would take place at Fort Bard in the Aosta Valley region of Italy in March 2014, as well as other locations in Aosta Valley including Aosta, Bard, Donnas, Pont-Saint-Martin, and Verrès.[126] The next month, the Gauteng Film Commission announced that action sequences would be filmed in Johannesburg, South Africa and other locations in Gauteng, beginning in mid-February.[127] A few weeks later Marvel announced that portions of the film would be shot in South Korea. Feige cited the nation's "cutting-edge technology, beautiful landscapes and spectacular architecture" as ideal for the film.[128] The nation's capital, Seoul, and Seoul's surrounding province, Gyeonggi, were selected as filming locations, with South Korea's Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism reimbursing up to 30% of the studio's expenditures, as part of a state-funded incentive program.[124]

Filming

Members of the Korea Film Commission and executives from Marvel Studios signing a memorandum of understanding in Seoul in March 2014 with actress Claudia Kim (center) in attendance
Filming began on Tuesday, February 11, 2014, in Johannesburg, South Africa, having been postponed that Monday.[127][129] Second unit crews shot action sequences without the main cast, to be used as background plates for scenes featuring the Hulk, in the Central Business District of Johannesburg for a period of two weeks.[130][131] By mid-March, principal photography had begun at Shepperton Studios near London and was scheduled to film there for at least four months,[132][133] under the working title After Party.[134] Filming at Shepperton as well as other locations in England allowed Whedon to get a "number of different looks and textures and moods" to give the film a different palette and fresh aesthetic from its predecessor.[70] Production designer Charles Wood built an enormous, new Avengers Tower set, one of the largest sets ever built for a Marvel film. The set featured multiple connected environments and levels.[135] On March 22, production moved to Fort Bard, Italy and continued in the Aosta Valley region through March 28. The region doubled as the fictional Eastern European nation of Sokovia,[39] with crews replacing local storefronts with Cyrillic script.[136] Filming in South Korea began on March 30 on the Mapo Bridge,[137] and continued through April 14 at various locations in Seoul.[138] While in Seoul, the production was able to attach cameras to drones and race cars to get unique camera angles and footage.[135] An artificial island on the Han River known as the Saebit Dungdungseom served as the headquarters of an IT institute featured in the film.[139] Scenes involving Ultron's attack on parts of the city were shot in the Gangnam District.[138]

In April, shooting began in Hawley Woods in Hampshire, England,[140] and Hayley Atwell, who played Peggy Carter in previous MCU films, filmed scenes inside the Rivoli Ballroom in London while extras performed the Lindy Hop.[57] That June, scenes were shot at the University of East Anglia in Norwich and at Dover Castle in Kent, with Dover Castle used for interior shots of Strucker's Hydra base in Sokovia.[141][142][143] The next month, filming took place at a training facility for London's Metropolitan Police Service, which doubled as a city in Sokovia.[16][39] Additional filming took place in Chittagong, Bangladesh, including the Chittagong Ship Breaking Yard,[144][145] and in New York City.[146][147] On August 6, Whedon announced on social media that he had completed principal photography on Avengers: Age of Ultron.[148] Disney spent $330.6 million on Avengers: Age of Ultron from February 2013 to November 2014, but $50.7 million of this was offset by payments from the UK tax authority.[149] A report on actual production costs for films from FilmL.A. Inc., indicated a gross budget of $444 million, with a net of $365 million for Avengers: Age of Ultron.[2] This makes the film the second most expensive film ever made.[150]

Cinematographer Ben Davis, who also worked with Marvel on Guardians of the Galaxy, shot the film with a main unit of three Arri Alexa cameras. Davis said, "Although the Alexa was Marvel's preferred camera, we weren't locked into that choice from the start. What wasn't negotiable was the fact that we were shooting digital: that's how Marvel shoots all of its films." Davis also used Blackmagic Design's Pocket Cinema Cameras to meet the needs of the second unit kit explaining, "The second unit typically needs a fleet of smaller cameras that are less expensive and are rugged enough to handle the various trials by fire, as it were, that we throw at them."[151] About the camera system, Whedon stated that this film was shot very differently from the first one; using many long lenses, and that he aimed to shoot the film almost like a documentary.[125] To create the scenes depicting how Quicksilver views the world, scenes were shot with an ultra-high-speed camera and later combined with shots of Taylor-Johnson moving through the same scene at normal speed.[39]

Post-production

The original shot (top) of the new Avengers training facility and the completed shot (bottom) with CG interiors added by Method Studios[152]
In June 2014, the IMAX Corporation announced that the IMAX release of the film would be converted to IMAX 3D.[153] Following the completion of principal photography several more cast members were revealed including Stellan Skarsgård,[59] Anthony Mackie,[53] Idris Elba, and Tom Hiddleston, reprising their roles from previous MCU films.[58] However, Hiddleston's scenes did not make the theatrical cut of the film, with Whedon saying what was shot "didn't play" and he did not want the film to feel "overstuffed".[87] According to Hiddleston, "In test screenings, audiences had overemphasized Loki's role, so they thought that because I was in it, I was controlling Ultron, and it was actually imbalancing people's expectations."[154] Whedon later explained that Elba and Atwell appear in the film because of exploring the psyches of the Avengers from Scarlet Witch's power.[39] In December 2014, Kim's role was revealed as Dr. Helen Cho.[80][155] Additional scenes were scheduled to be filmed in January 2015 at Pinewood Studios.[156] In February 2015, Marvel confirmed through promotional material that Serkis portrays Ulysses Klaue in the film.[35][64] In early April 2015, Linda Cardellini and Julie Delpy were confirmed to be part of the film's cast.[78][82] At the same time, Whedon stated that the film would not contain a post-credits scene, which had become customary for MCU films. Whedon tried to come up with a post-credit scene but felt that he could not top the "Shawarma scene" in The Avengers, explaining, "It didn't seem to lend itself in the same way, and we wanted to be true to what felt right. The first rule of making a sequel is take the best moments and do something else. Don't do the Indiana Jones gun trick again differently. Just go somewhere else. Don't try to hit the same highs, because people will sense it." However, Feige clarified, "There will be a tag [shortly after the credits start]. But there's not a post–post–credit scene."[78]

In May 2015, Whedon revealed he was in conflict with Marvel executives and the film's editors about certain scenes in the film. The executives were not "thrilled" with the scenes at Hawkeye's farm or the dream sequences the Avengers experience because of Scarlet Witch. Also, Whedon had originally shot a much longer scene with Thor and Selvig in the cave but the final version is shorter as test audiences did not respond well to the original cut.[157] In the scene, Thor would be possessed by a Norn, a goddess of destiny, while Selvig would quiz her about Thor's hallucination.[158][159][160] Additionally, Whedon reiterated he had wanted to include Captain Marvel and Spider-Man at the end, but deals for each character (signing of an actress and a deal with Sony Pictures Entertainment, respectively) were not completed in time for their inclusion.[157]

The film contains 3,000 visual effects shots,[161] completed by ten different visual effects studios, including Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), Trixter, Double Negative, Animal Logic, Framestore, Lola VFX, Territory, Perception, Method Studios, Luma Pictures and The Third Floor.[162] ILM opened a facility in London, citing Avengers: Age of Ultron as a catalyst for the expansion,[163] and developed a new motion capture system for the film called Muse, which can better capture an actor's performance and combine different takes.[164] About the motion capture process, Ruffalo called it "more of a collaboration" since the technology is advancing, with "the face capture and the motion capture can now [being] put together, [allowing] you [to] get a lot more latitude as a performer… you're no longer constricted by the attributes that you have as a person: your age, or weight, or size. None of that matters anymore. And so there's this whole exciting place to go that is kind of unknown."[21] Visual effects supervisor Christopher Townsend said that the visual effects team considered depicting the Hulk when manipulated by Wanda Maximoff as being grey skinned with red eyes, but eventually decided against it, as they did not want to confuse audiences who might associate it with "Joe Fixit", the grey Hulk from the comics.[165]

Method Studios created the interior of the new Avengers training facility by digitally designing the training facility, extracting the characters from the original set and placing them into the new CG environment. Method also contributed to Iron Man's new Mark 45 suit and played a key role in creating Scarlet Witch's CG mind control effect.[152] Following the trend in recent years, most of the computer screens in Stark's lab, Dr Cho's laboratory, the Quinjet and other locations in the film were not added in post-production but were actually working screens on set, adding to the realism of the film and saving some on the post-production budget. London-based Territory Studio delivered the screen visuals filled with unique imagery and animations that matched the character using them.[162] Perception worked on the main-on-end and main titles for the film. Before settling on the marble monument depiction for the main-on-end titles, Perception created three other versions, which were based on Ultron's hive mind ability from the film, "renderings of power and pure energy" inspired by classic comic panels, and classic moments for each character. The final design was inspired by war monuments such as the Iwo Jima memorial. For the main titles, Marvel wanted the typeface to be a direct continuation of the first film. Perception made the typeface a marble texture to mimic the main-on-end titles and changed the title's rotation (away from the camera instead of towards the camera in The Avengers), before "Age of Ultron" overtakes "Avengers" in a vibranium texture.[166]

Music
Main article: Avengers: Age of Ultron (soundtrack)
In March 2014, Brian Tyler signed on to compose the film's score, replacing the composer for the first film, Alan Silvestri, while also marking his third film collaboration with Marvel following Iron Man 3 and Thor: The Dark World in 2013.[167] Tyler stated that the score pays homage to John Williams' scores for Star Wars, Superman, and Raiders of the Lost Ark and references the scores for the Iron Man, Thor, and Captain America films in order to create a similar musical universe, saying, "That's the goal for sure. You have to build in nostalgia and do it upfront so you can relate to it."[168] Danny Elfman also contributed music to the score,[169] using Silvestri's theme from the first film to create a new hybrid theme.[170] Hollywood Records released the album digitally on April 28, 2015, and in physical formats on May 19.[171]

Marketing
Promotion
At the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con International, Whedon introduced a teaser trailer for the film, which included a look at an Ultron helmet and a title treatment.[172] Footage of the teaser, as well as a brief interview with Whedon, was made available as part of Iron Man 3's second screen companion app for its Blu-ray release on September 24, 2013.[173][174] On March 18, 2014, ABC aired a one-hour television special titled, Marvel Studios: Assembling a Universe, which included a sneak peek of Avengers: Age of Ultron.[175] The special debuted concept art for Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch, as well as art of the Hulk fighting the "Hulkbuster" Iron Man suit.[176][177] Harley-Davidson partnered with Marvel to provide their first electric motorcycle, Project LiveWire, for use by Black Widow in the film.[178] As with previous films, Audi provided several vehicles for the Age of Ultron and commercials promoting these vehicles.[179] At the 2014 San Diego Comic-Con, the cast was introduced to promote the film, along with screening footage from the film.[180] Avengers: Age of Ultron received the second most social media mentions at the convention, following Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, but had a higher intend-to-see response.[181]

External video
 Marvel's "Avengers: Age of Ultron" – Teaser Trailer (OFFICIAL) The use of the song "I've Got No Strings" from Pinocchio (1940) was lauded by critics.[182][183][184]
The first trailer was scheduled to premiere during the airing of an episode of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on October 28, 2014.[185] However, on October 22, the trailer leaked online,[186] and within a few hours Marvel officially released the trailer on YouTube.[187] Entertainment Weekly and The Hollywood Reporter noted the effective use of the song "I've Got No Strings" from Pinocchio (1940) in the trailer.[182][183] Scott Mendelson of Forbes felt the trailer was "such a textbook 'dark sequel' trailer that it borders on parody" but said, "it's a pretty spectacular piece of marketing, one that elevates itself both by the music choices and by James Spader's vocals as the title villain".[184] The trailer received 34.3 million global views in 24 hours, 26.2 million from Marvel's YouTube channel, which broke the previous record held by Iron Man 3 with 23.14 million views. In comparison, the original Avengers teaser received 20.4 million views in 24 hours after its debut.[188][189] In response, Marvel agreed to air footage from Age of Ultron during the episode of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. that was originally scheduled to premiere the trailer.[188] At the end of October, Marvel Comic's Editor-in-Chief Axel Alonso stated there were comic tie-in plans for the film.[190]

In November 2014, ABC aired another one-hour television special titled Marvel 75 Years: From Pulp to Pop!, which featured behind the scenes footage of Age of Ultron.[191] Also in November, an extended trailer debuted on Samsung Mobile's YouTube channel, featuring product placement for various Samsung devices.[192] In December 2014, additional behind the scenes footage was released as a special feature on the Guardians of the Galaxy Blu-ray, highlighting the various filming locations for the film.[147][193] Also in the month, ABC announced that an episode of Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. would tie-in to the events of the film.[194] The episodes "The Frenemy of My Enemy" and "The Dirty Half Dozen" feature "Easter eggs, plot threads and other connective tissue leading into the opening scene of Avengers: Age of Ultron" while "Scars" explores the aftermath of the film.[195]

In January 2015, a featurette focusing on Ultron was shown at Samsung's "Night With Marvel" event at the 2015 Consumer Electronics Show (CES).[196] Also at CES, Samsung revealed a selection of hardware inspired by the Avengers films, as well as a simulation of Avengers Tower via its Gear VR virtual reality device.[197][198] A second trailer premiered on ESPN on January 12, 2015 during the broadcast of the 2015 College Football Playoff National Championship.[199] Mendelson enjoyed the trailer, but wished it did not reveal as many story elements as it did. However, he added, "the marketing thus far [for the film] has been far superior to much of what sold The Avengers three years ago, both in terms of the specific footage and the artistic choices being made… I'm sold, and I imagine most of the general moviegoers are already onboard too."[200]

On February 3, 2014, Marvel "stealth released" a one-shot digital-only tie-in comic, Avengers: Age of Ultron Prelude—This Scepter'd Isle. Written by Will Corona Pilgrim and illustrated by Wellinton Alves, it reveals how Strucker came into possession of Loki's scepter and the origin of the Maximoff twins' abilities.[201] At the end of the month, the film's official poster was revealed. Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter criticized it for its lack of originality, calling it "pretty much the poster for the first Avengers movie, except with added flying robots in the background" and the fact that it incorporated many of the same tropes the other MCU Phase Two film posters did. These included the hero(es) staring off camera; destruction in the background as well as something occurring in the sky; and poor Photoshop on the poster, highlighting the fact that each of the actors were obviously photographed separately and were later composited together into the poster.[202] Mendelson agreed with many of McMillan's observations, and called the poster "hilariously photoshopped".[203]

The final trailer was "unlocked" by fans on March 4, 2015, via the use of hashtags on Twitter, ahead of its broadcast debut during the series premiere of American Crime on March 5.[204] Mendelson felt "this [was] a fine final trailer, teasing what we already know, hinting at the scale and a few new action beats without telling us much we don't already know" adding, "Here we have the fourth and final Avengers: Age of Ultron trailer and we don't know all that much about what transpires in a moment-to-moment sense in the finished 150-minute feature. I have expressed my concern dating back to October that Marvel and Disney would release too many trailers and would by default give away too much plot and character information between October and May. But if this really is the final Avengers 2 trailer, then at least on the trailer front they have kept the film relatively unspoiled."[205] A week after the final trailer debuted, Marvel revealed that the trailer had "smashed records" with over 35 million views.[206]

In April 2015, members of the cast presented Downey with the MTV Generation Award at the 2015 MTV Movie Awards, along with debuting an exclusive clip from the film.[207] On April 27, Downey and Renner along with executives from Marvel Entertainment rang the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange in celebration of the film's theatrical release.[208] Disney spent a total of $26.9 million on television advertisements for the film,[209] from an estimated total marketing budget of $180 million.[210]

Merchandise
In January 2015, Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment and Traveller's Tales announced a Lego video game adaptation of the first film and Age of Ultron for release in late 2015 on a variety of video game consoles.[211] In March 2015, Disney said it planned to broaden its merchandising strategy with Avengers: Age of Ultron by expanding the target demographics to women and to fans of the individual superheroes that make up the Avengers. Paul Gitter, senior vice president of Marvel licensing for Disney Consumer Products, said, "For the first film, we primarily focused on the Avengers property and the group shots… Now we're broadening the line and scope to create skews that focus on the team and the individuals characters, as well." Disney Consumer Products partnered with Hasbro, Lego, Hot Wheels and Funko for action figures, playsets and other toys, and with Under Armour for apparel. Disney established new partnerships in the food and packaged-goods categories, including with Sage Fruit, ConAgra, Crunchpak and Chobani.[212] Walt Disney India's consumer products partnered with 50 brands to promote the film in India, considered the highest ever for any film—Hollywood or Bollywood—released in India (the previous record held by Ra.One had 25 partners). Some of the brands include Amazon India, toy retailer Hamleys India, online fashion store Myntra, Hero Cycles, Mountain Dew, Liberty Shoes, Tupperware, and Subway restaurants among others.[213]

Release
Theatrical

Renner arriving at the world premiere of Avengers: Age of Ultron
Avengers: Age of Ultron made its world premiere at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood on April 13, 2015,[214][215] and held its European premiere on April 21 at the Vue West End in London.[216] The film was released in 11 territories on April 22, with its release jumping to 55% of its international market (44 countries) by the end of its first weekend,[217][218] before releasing on May 1 in the United States, in 3D and IMAX 3D.[153][217][219][220] In the United States, the film opened in 4,276 theaters, including 2,761 3D theaters, 364 IMAX, 400 premium large format, and 143 D-Box theaters.[221] Many independent theater owners in Germany (approximately 700 screens) boycotted the film in response to Disney raising its rental fee from 47.7% to 53% of ticket sales. The owners felt that the "increased fees, coupled with the cost of digitization, and rising staff and marketing costs may force some of them out of business."[222] Avengers: Age of Ultron is part of Phase Two of the MCU.[223]

In September 2014, TNT acquired the US cable broadcast rights, for broadcast two years after its theatrical release.[224] On March 4, 2015, ticket pre-sales for the film began. Variety noted, "The two-month gap between advance sales and the release is much wider than normal and reflects the heavy fan anticipation" for the film.[225]

Home media
Avengers: Age of Ultron was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on digital download on September 8, 2015, and on Blu-ray and DVD on October 2, 2015.[226] The digital and Blu-ray releases include behind-the-scenes featurettes, audio commentary, deleted scenes and a blooper reel.[227] The film was also collected in a 13-disc box set, titled "Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Two Collection", which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. It was released on December 8, 2015.[228] In July 2015, Whedon stated that he did not intend on releasing a director's cut of Avengers: Age of Ultron because despite the film's complexity, he was satisfied with the theatrical version and did not think it needed to be tweaked.[229] Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the film on Ultra HD Blu-ray on August 14, 2018.[230]

Reception
Box office
Avengers: Age of Ultron grossed $459 million in the United States and Canada and $943.8 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $1.403 billion.[4] It became the fifth-highest-grossing film of all time and the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2015.[231][232] Avengers: Age of Ultron's worldwide opening of $392.5 million was the seventh-largest ever.[233] The film set a worldwide IMAX opening-weekend record with $25.2 million (previously held by The Dark Knight Rises) and also broke the record for the fastest movie to make over $40 million in IMAX theaters, doing so in 12 days.[234] According to some analysts, the opening weekend box office gross was lower than expected because of the weekend's featured boxing match between Floyd Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao.[235] Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $382.32 million, when factoring together "production budgets, P&A, talent participations and other costs, with box office grosses, and ancillary revenues from VOD to DVD and TV," placing it fourth on their list of 2015's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[236]

On May 15, 2015, Avengers: Age of Ultron became the twenty-first film in cinematic history, the third Marvel Studios film and the eighth film distributed by Disney to cross the $1 billion threshold at the box office.[237]

United States and Canada
Avengers: Age of Ultron earned $84.46 million on its opening day, marking the biggest opening day for a superhero film and the second-biggest opening and second-biggest single-day gross, behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ($91.7 million). The film's Friday gross included $27.6 million from Thursday night, which began at 7 p.m., and was the sixth-highest ever for Thursday preview earnings and the highest among Marvel films.[238][239] The film totaled $191.3 million in its opening weekend, the third-highest gross behind Jurassic World ($208.8 million) and The Avengers ($207.4 million).[240] It also saw the second-highest IMAX opening weekend total with $18 million (behind The Dark Knight Rises), a record $13.5 million from premium large format theaters and the highest share for the first weekend in May, accounting for 85% of the top twelve box office total earnings (previously held by Spider-Man 3).[238][241] Of those in attendance the first weekend, 59% were male, 41% were female and 59% were over the age of 25.[238]

In its second weekend, the film fell 59%, earning $77.7 million, which was the second-biggest second weekend gross behind The Avengers' $103 million (both were surpassed a month later by Jurassic World's $106.6 million).[242] It holds the record for the second-biggest loss between first and second weekends with $113.6 million, only behind Deathly Hallows – Part 2's $121 million loss between its first and second weekends in 2011.[243] It became the third-highest-grossing film of 2015.[244]

Outside territories
Avengers: Age of Ultron earned $200.2 million in its first weekend from 44 countries, opening in first in all, which was 44% above its predecessor's opening. Additionally, the film saw the largest non-China international IMAX opening with $10.4 million. The top earning countries were South Korea ($28.2 million), the UK ($27.3 million) and Russia ($16.2 million).[218] The film broke records in many countries, including opening-day records in Mexico ($6.8 million), the Philippines ($1.6 million), and Indonesia ($900,000);[234][238][245] opening-weekend records in Mexico ($25.5 million), Russia and the CIS ($16.2 million), Hong Kong ($6.4 million), and the Philippines ($7.7 million); and highest opening weekend for a superhero film in the UK, Ireland and Malta ($27.3 million), Germany ($9.3 million), Sweden, Norway, and the Netherlands.[218][234][246]

In the UK, where Age of Ultron was filmed, it earned $5.4 million on its opening day and $27.3 million during the weekend, setting an opening-weekend record for a superhero film, Marvel's biggest opening in Britain, the biggest April opening, the eighth-biggest debut.[247] It also set the best single-day earning for a Disney and superhero film with its $9.4 million haul on Saturday.[247][248] In South Korea, also where part of the film was shot, the film earned $4.9 million on its opening day and $28.2 through the weekend.[218][247] It held the record for advance-ticket sales rate, accounting for 96% of tickets reserved, breaking Transformers: Dark of the Moon's record of 94.6% in 2011, the widest release ever, across 1,826 screens, also breaking Dark of the Moon's 1,420 screens, and the fastest imported film to surpass one million admissions, doing so in two days;[249] it topped the box office for three consecutive weekends,[250] and became the biggest Disney/Marvel release as well as the second-biggest Western film in the country.[251] The Chinese opening scored the biggest weekday opening day, as well as the biggest Disney/Marvel opening, with $33.9 million,[252] and the second-biggest six-day start with $156.3 million (behind Furious 7) of which $17.5 million came from IMAX theaters—the biggest ever.[251] Age of Ultron also opened at number one in Japan in early July 2015 with $6.5 million, the highest opening weekend for an MCU release.[253] As of March 10, 2019, it is the ninth-highest-grossing film,[254] and the fourth-highest-grossing 2015 film.[255] Its largest markets were China ($240.1 million), South Korea ($78 million), and the UK, Ireland and Malta ($76.6 million).[256]

Critical response
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 75% approval rating with an average score of 6.75/10, based on 360 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Exuberant and eye-popping, Avengers: Age of Ultron serves as an overstuffed but mostly satisfying sequel, reuniting its predecessor's unwieldy cast with a few new additions and a worthy foe."[257] On Metacritic, the film achieved an average score of 66 out of 100, based on 49 critics, signifying "generally favorable reviews".[258] CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an "A" grade on an A+ to F scale,[238] while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an overall positive score of 90% and a 79% recommend.[259]

Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said, "Avengers: Age of Ultron succeeds in the top priority of creating a worthy opponent for its superheroes and giving the latter a few new things to do, but this time the action scenes don't always measure up."[260] Scott Foundas of Variety wrote, "If this is what the apotheosis of branded, big-studio entertainment has come to look like in 2015, we could be doing much worse. Unlike its title character, Age of Ultron most definitely has soul."[261] Writing for the Chicago Sun-Times and giving the film three-and-a-half out of four stars, Richard Roeper said, "Some day, an Avengers film might collapse under the weight of its own awesomeness. I mean, how many times can they save the world? But this is not that day."[262] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote, "Age of Ultron is a whole summer of fireworks packed into one movie. It doesn't just go to 11, it starts there. [Joss Whedon] takes a few wrong turns, creating a jumble when the action gets too thick. But he recovers like a pro, devising a spectacle that's epic in every sense of the word."[263] Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film three out of four stars, stating that despite being "bigger, louder and more disjointed" than its predecessor, "it's also got more personality—specifically Whedon's—than any other film in the now seven-year-old franchise."[264] Helen O'Hara of Empire praised the interactions between the characters, the action set-pieces and Whedon's ability as a director in her review, stating that the film "redefines the scale we can expect from our superheroes."[265]

Conversely, Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said, "Although this movie is effective moment to moment, very little of it lingers in the mind afterward. The ideal vehicle for our age of immediate sensation and instant gratification, it disappears without a trace almost as soon as it's consumed."[266] Scott Mendelson of Forbes said, "Avengers: Age of Ultron plays like an obligation, a box to be checked off on a list before all parties move onto the things they really want to do."[267] Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote, "This Avengers doesn't always pop the way that the first one sometimes did, partly because its villain isn't as memorable, despite Mr. Spader's silky threat."[268] Camilla Long of The Sunday Times remarked, "Two hours of boredom and boobs add up to a sorry basis for the new Avengers."[269] Much like the release of Guardians of the Galaxy, the film received mixed reviews upon release in China, due to poor translations. The translations, which were said to be too literal, were thought "to have been done by Google Translate."[270]

Accolades
In December 2015, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences placed Avengers: Age of Ultron on their shortlist of potential nominees for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects at the 88th Academy Awards,[271] but ultimately did not nominate it for the award.[272]

Year	Award / Film Festival	Category	Recipient(s)	Result	Ref(s)
2015	Teen Choice Awards	Choice Movie: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Avengers: Age of Ultron	Nominated	[273]
Choice Movie Actor: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Robert Downey Jr.	Nominated
Choice Movie Actress: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Scarlett Johansson	Nominated
Choice Movie: Scene Stealer	Chris Evans	Won	[274]
Choice Movie: Breakout Star	Elizabeth Olsen	Nominated
Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts Awards	Best Visual Effects or Animation	Christopher Townsend, Ryan Stafford, Paul Butterworth and Matt Estela	Nominated	[275]
2016	People's Choice Awards	Favorite Movie	Avengers: Age of Ultron	Nominated	[276]
Favorite Action Movie	Nominated
Favorite Movie Actor	Robert Downey Jr.	Nominated
Favorite Movie Actress	Scarlett Johansson	Nominated
Favorite Action Movie Actor	Robert Downey Jr.	Nominated
Chris Hemsworth	Won
Favorite Action Movie Actress	Scarlett Johansson	Nominated
Annie Awards	Outstanding Achievement, Animated Effects in a Live Action Production	Michael Balog, Jim Van Allen, Florent Andorra, Georg Kaltenbrunner, for Sokovia's destruction	Won	[277]
Outstanding Achievement, Character Animation in a Live Action Production	Jakub Pistecky, Gang Trinh, Craig Penn, Mickael Coedel, Yair Gutierrez, for the Hulk	Nominated
Peter Tan, Boonyiki Lim, Sachio Nishiyama, Byounghee Cho, Roy Tan, for Ultron	Nominated
Visual Effects Society	Outstanding Animated Performance in a Photoreal Feature	Jakub Pistecky, Lana Lan, John Walker, Sean Comer	Nominated	[278]
Outstanding Effects Simulations in a Photoreal Feature	Michael Balog, Jim Van Allen, Florent Andorra, Georg Kaltenbrunner	Nominated
Outstanding Models in a Photoreal or Animated Project	Howie Weed, Robert Marinic, Daniel Gonzalez, Myriam Catrin, for Hulkbuster	Nominated
Kids' Choice Awards	Favorite Movie	Avengers: Age of Ultron	Nominated	[279]
Favorite Movie Actor	Chris Evans	Nominated
Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Robert Downey Jr.	Nominated
Favorite Movie Actress	Scarlett Johansson	Nominated
Saturn Awards	Best Comic-to-Film Motion Picture	Avengers: Age of Ultron	Nominated	[280]
Best Supporting Actor	Paul Bettany	Nominated
Best Film Costume Design	Alexandra Byrne	Won
Best Film Special / Visual Effects	Paul Corbould, Chris Townsend, Ben Snow, Paul Butterworth	Nominated
MTV Movie Awards	Movie of the Year	Avengers: Age of Ultron	Nominated	[281]
Best Hero	Chris Evans	Nominated
Best Villain	James Spader	Nominated
Best Virtual Performance	James Spader	Nominated
Ensemble Cast	Avengers: Age of Ultron	Nominated
Best Fight	Robert Downey Jr. vs. Mark Ruffalo	Nominated
Hugo Award	Best Dramatic Presentation - Long Form	Avengers: Age of Ultron	Nominated	[282]
Sequels
Main articles: Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame
Further information: List of Marvel Cinematic Universe films
Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame were directed by Anthony and Joe Russo, from a script by Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely.[283][284][285] Infinity War was released on April 27, 2018,[286] and the sequel on April 26, 2019.[285] Much of the cast returns for Infinity War with additional cast and characters joining from other MCU films.[287]

Notes
 While the name of the anti-Hulk armor, usually referred to as the "Hulkbuster" in comic books, is not spoken in the film, its deployment system and containment cell are code-named "Veronica".[5][6] Director Joss Whedon said the name alludes to the character Veronica Lodge from Archie Comics: "I just decided to call it Veronica because [Bruce Banner] used to be in love with a girl named Betty and Veronica is the opposite of that," making the connection to Archie's love interest, Betty Cooper.[6]
 According to Kevin Feige, the Infinity Gauntlet seen at the end of the film is not the same as the one seen in Odin's vault in Asgard in Thor.[7] The Asgard Gauntlet is revealed to be a fake in Thor: Ragnarok.[8]
See also
List of films featuring powered exoskeletons
References
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron (12A)". British Board of Film Classification. April 13, 2015. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2015.
 2015 Feature Film Study (PDF) (Report). FilmL.A. Inc. p. 21. Archived from the original on July 4, 2016. Retrieved November 19, 2017.
 Sylt, Christian (April 27, 2018). "Disney Reveals Financial Muscle Of 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2018.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 30, 2019.
 Cavanaugh, Patrick (January 12, 2015). "Ultron Pulls the Strings in New 'Avengers' Trailer". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on January 16, 2015. Get even more of Iron Man's Hulkbuster armor in action....
 Burlingame, Russ (April 11, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Features an Archie Comics Reference". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
 Eisenberg, Eric (May 1, 2015). "The Big Secret Behind The Infinity Gauntlet, According To Marvel's Kevin Feige". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015. I asked Feige if the presence of the Infinity Gauntlet in the mid-credits sequence was a rewrite in continuity or something else entirely, and he explained that nothing is being overwritten. Or as he put it, There are two different gloves. That was not Odin's vault that you see at the end. When you think about it, this really does make all kinds of sense. After all, the idea of forging just one cosmic artifact glove is kind of silly when most have two hands, right? So there is a degree of sense in Thanos having his own gauntlet while its double continues to rest on Asgard.
 Sciretta, Peter (November 6, 2017). "Kevin Feige Answers Your Lingering 'Thor: Ragnarok' Spoiler Questions". /Film. Archived from the original on November 26, 2017. Retrieved December 1, 2017.
 Wigler, Josh (September 6, 2013). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' And Iron Man: New Movie, Same Tony". MTV. Archived from the original on September 9, 2013. Retrieved September 7, 2013.
 Tilly, Chris (July 16, 2014). "Marvel's Kevin Feige Discusses Avengers Tower And Hulkbuster Armour In Age Of Ultron". IGN. Archived from the original on July 17, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2014.
 Dibdin, Emma (January 31, 2015). "25 things we learned on the set of Avengers: Age of Ultron". DigitalSpy.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2015. Retrieved January 31, 2015.
 "Robert Downey Jr. To Return As Marvel's Iron Man". Marvel.com. June 20, 2013. Archived from the original on June 24, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 Keyes, Rob (October 28, 2014). "'Avengers 2' Set Interview: Robert Downey Jr. Talks Ultron & Vision". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Malec, Brett; Malkin, Marc (September 9, 2013). "Chris Hemsworth Talks "Awkward" Naked Movie Scenes, Snow White Sequel With Kristen Stewart". E!. Archived from the original on September 11, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
 Cornet, Roth (February 27, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Even Thor Can't Fight Ultron". IGN. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved February 27, 2015.
 Vary, Adam (October 27, 2014). "What's At Stake For Thor, Captain America, And The "Avengers" Franchise". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 27, 2014.
 Ruffalo, Mark (March 6, 2013). "A lot of folks have been asking about the Next Hulk. The next time you see my Hulk it will be in the Avengers2. No plans for stand alone". Twitter. Archived from the original on October 30, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2013.
 Cohen, David S. (June 27, 2014). "Q&A: Andy Serkis Talks 'Apes' and 'Avengers'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved June 27, 2014.
 Risley, Matt (June 5, 2014). "Mark Ruffalo on his 'bigger, more complex' Hulk in Avengers: Age of Ultron". Total Film. Archived from the original on June 6, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2014.
 Breznican, Anthony (July 21, 2014). "Mark Ruffalo on the foe Hulk needs for a stand-alone movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 22, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2014.
 Cornet, Roth (October 28, 2014). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Mark Ruffalo Says There's A Confrontation Coming Between The Hulk And Banner". IGN. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved November 3, 2014.
 Weintraub, Steve (December 17, 2014). "Joss Whedon Talks Hesitation to Return, New Additions to the Team, Collaborating with Marvel, and More on the Set of 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Collider.com. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014.
 Flemming, Jr., Mike (August 1, 2013). "Chris Evans To Helm '1:30 Train' Before Reprising Captain America In 'Avengers 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 4, 2013.
 Weintraub, Kit (August 10, 2013). "Chris Evans Talks Captain America: The Winter Soldier and The Avengers: Age of Ultron, Says Avengers Sequel Starts Filming First Week of March". Collider.com. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2013.
 Nepales, Reuben P. (April 4, 2014). "Chris Evans on starting 'Avengers 2,' retiring". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved April 4, 2014.
 Davis, Erick (March 3, 2015). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron': Check Out Our Top-Secret Meetings with Captain America and Hawkeye". Fandango. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015. Retrieved March 3, 2015.
 Maresca, Rachel (September 29, 2013). "Scarlett Johansson flaunts curves in new magazine photo shoot, reveals details on 'The Avengers' sequel". Daily News. Archived from the original on September 29, 2013. Retrieved September 29, 2013.
 Couto, Anthony (February 12, 2014). "Feige: Black Widow's Past to be Explored in Avengers 2 and Possible Solo Film". IGN. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved February 13, 2014.
 Johannson, Scarlett (March 19, 2014). Scarlett Johansson Talks The Avengers: Age of Ultron (video). IGN. Archived from the original on March 20, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2014.
 Cornet, Roth (July 17, 2014). "Avengers: Age Of Ultron Scarlett Johansson Talks Black Widow's Greatest Power". IGN. Archived from the original on July 20, 2014. Retrieved July 17, 2014.
 Breznican, Anthony (July 18, 2014). "How 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' will hide Scarlett Johansson's pregnancy". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 19, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2014.
 Weintraub, Steve (December 18, 2013). "Jeremy Renner talks American Hustle, collaborating with David O. Russell, the way he likes to work, 2015 projects, and more". Collider.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. Retrieved March 28, 2014.
 White, Brett (July 25, 2013). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' To Feature Lots More Black Widow And Hawkeye". MTV. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved July 25, 2013.
 Thompson, Arienne (December 12, 2013). "Don Cheadle mellow, 'barely awake' after Globes news". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2013.
 "'The Avengers: Age of Ultron' New Stills, Behind-the-Scenes in High Resolution; Serkis Confirmed as Klaw". Stitch Kingdom. February 3, 2015. Archived from the original on February 4, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
 "Official: Elizabeth Olsen & Aaron Taylor-Johnson Join 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Marvel.com. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved November 25, 2013.
 "Aaron Taylor-Johnson on wanting to 'push the boundaries' with Quicksilver". Total Film. August 1, 2013. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 Nicholson, Max (July 22, 2014). "How Avengers: Age of Ultron Quicksilver Is Different From X-Men: Days of Future Past". IGN. Archived from the original on July 29, 2014. Retrieved July 22, 2014.
 Vary, Adam (March 27, 2015). "How Joss Whedon Brought Quicksilver And Scarlet Witch To The "Avengers" Franchise". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015.
 Breznican, Anthony (July 16, 2014). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron': Why Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch and The Vision will fight the bad fight". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 18, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2014.
 Nicholson, Max; Cornet, Roth (March 30, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron – How Powerful is Scarlet Witch?". IGN. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015.
 White, Brett (January 27, 2015). "COMIC REEL: DOWNEY MAY KEEP "BUMPING ALONG" WITH MARVEL; MOMOA TALKS AQUAMAN'S LOOK". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 30, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2015.
 Ritman, Alex (December 16, 2014). "Dubai Film Fest: Paul Bettany Talks 'Avengers 2' and Watching Jennifer Connelly Inject Herself". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved December 16, 2014.
 Kroll, Justin (February 6, 2014). "Paul Bettany to Play the Vision in Marvel's 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 7, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014.
 "'Avengers 2' Story Details: Ultron & Vision's MCU Origins Clarified". Screen Rant. April 9, 2014. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015.
 Starnes, Joshua (July 26, 2014). "Comic-Con Interview: Paul Bettany on Playing The Vision in Avengers: Age of Ultron". Superhero Hype!. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014.
 Nazzaro, Joe (August 6, 2015). "Creating 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Vision Make-up". Make-Up Artist Magazine. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved August 8, 2015.
 Goldman, Eric (January 21, 2014). "Cobie Smulders on Reaching the End of How I Met Your Mother: "I Know the Whole Thing."". IGN. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved March 10, 2014.
 Graser, Marc (October 29, 2012). "Frank Grillo to play Crossbones in 'Captain America' sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on November 1, 2012. Retrieved October 29, 2012.
 Strom, Marc (April 9, 2014). "Cobie Smulders Brings Maria Hill Back to Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 19, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2014.
 "Jeremy Renner, Cobie Smulders reveal what they *won't* be doing in 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Entertainment Weekly. July 26, 2014. Archived from the original on July 30, 2014. Retrieved September 16, 2014.
 Towers, Andrea (December 15, 2014). "Cobie Smulders tackles motherhood in Sundance film 'Unexpected' – exclusive photo". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved December 16, 2014.
 Lussier, Germain (February 24, 2015). "The Gang's All Here in the Official 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Poster [UPDATED]". /Film. Archived from the original on February 25, 2015. Retrieved February 24, 2015.
 Ching, Albert (March 29, 2015). "ECCC: Anthony Mackie: Unleash The Falcon". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 30, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015.
 Lussier, Germain (July 20, 2015). "The 5 Ant-Man Spoilers You Absolutely Need to Know". io9. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015.
 Goldman, Eric (March 8, 2016). "Anthony Mackie Talks Civil War And Learning He Was An Avenger When He Saw Age Of Ultron". IGN. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016.
 Orange, Alan (July 21, 2014). "Hayley Atwell Says Agent Carter Is Back in 'Avengers 2'". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved February 5, 2016.
 McLean, Craig (November 2, 2014). "Idris Elba interview: Marvel movies are 'torture'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on November 2, 2014. Retrieved November 2, 2014.
 "Skarsgard fine with Avengers nudity". Irish Independent. August 16, 2014. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 16, 2014.
 Lee, Ben (November 16, 2015). "Is Stellan Skarsgard coming back for Thor: Ragnarok? "They have an option on me"". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 1, 2015. Retrieved November 30, 2015.
 "Exclusive: 'Avengers Age of Ultron' Casts James Spader as the Film's Legendary Villain". Marvel.com. August 29, 2013. Archived from the original on September 4, 2013. Retrieved August 30, 2013.
 Breznican, Anthony (August 29, 2013). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron': James Spader to play maniacal robot in Marvel sequel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013. Retrieved August 29, 2013.
 Breznican, Anthony (July 16, 2014). "Who is Marvel's angry, metal 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' madman – and why does he hate you?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 17, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2014.
 "Get to Know the 'Avengers' as They Assemble for New Adventure". Philippine Daily Inquirer. April 3, 2015. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2015.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 8, 2015). "This Week's Cover: Avengers: Age of Ultron assembles its own worst enemy". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015.
 Cink, Lorraine (September 11, 2013). Marvel's The Watcher 2013 – Episode 31. Marvel.com. Event occurs at 0:53. Archived from the original on September 17, 2013. Retrieved September 11, 2013.
 Ryan, Mike (October 21, 2013). "What To Expect From James Spader's Ultron In 'Avengers' Sequel". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2013.
 McMillan, Graeme (September 30, 2013). "James Spader Explains Why He Signed on as Ultron". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2013.
 "'Avengers 2' scoop: How Ultron will differ from the comics – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. August 21, 2013. Archived from the original on August 24, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2013.
 de Semlyen, Phil (April 24, 2014). "Joss Whedon Talks Avengers: Age Of Ultron". Empire. Archived from the original on April 28, 2014. Retrieved April 24, 2014.
 "In 2015, Artificial Intelligence Will Rule the (Movie) World". Entertainment Weekly. December 22, 2014. Archived from the original on October 26, 2015. Retrieved February 26, 2015.
 Rivera, Joshua (July 26, 2014). "James Spader reveals why his 'Avengers 2' character hates the Avengers". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014.
 McIntyre, Gina (April 24, 2016). "Joss Whedon and cast face superheroic challenge in 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 26, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016.
 Truitt, Brian (August 18, 2013). "Sunday Geekersation: Jackson unleashes the Fury". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 19, 2013. Retrieved August 18, 2013.
 Butler, Tom (March 26, 2014). "Nick Fury's role in Avengers 2 is just a cameo". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved March 26, 2014.
 Kit, Borys (January 15, 2014). "'Dracula' Actor to Play Villain in 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 15, 2014. Retrieved January 15, 2014.
 Collinson, Gary (April 26, 2015). "Two new clips from Marvel's Avengers: Age of Ultron". Flickering Myth. Archived from the original on April 28, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 7, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron won't have a post-credit scene, Joss Whedon says". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015.
 Rosenberg, Alyssa (May 6, 2015). "The rise of Linda Cardellini". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Keyes, Rob (April 3, 2015). "'Avengers 2' Facts & Videos: Details on New Characters, Costumes, Tech & Weapons". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2015.
 Stern, Marlow (July 14, 2014). "Motion Capture Maestro Andy Serkis on 'Dawn of the Planet of the Apes' and Revolutionizing Cinema". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved July 14, 2014.
 Outlaw, Kofi (April 2, 2015). "'Avengers 2' Premiere Sheet Reveals Additional Cast Member [Updated]". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 4, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2015.
 "That Irish accent in Avengers Age of Ultron is actress Kerry Condon!". Irish Examiner. April 23, 2015. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved April 26, 2015.
 Cox, Danny (May 7, 2015). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron' – 14 of the Actual Easter Eggs in Marvel's Latest Film". Inquisitr. Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016.
 Owen, Luke (April 21, 2015). "Spoilers: And the post-credits scene from Avengers: Age of Ultron is..." Flickering Myth. Archived from the original on July 18, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
 Leston, Ryan (July 13, 2014). "Stan Lee Confirms Avengers: Age Of Ultron Cameo". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved July 13, 2014.
 Wigler, Josh; Horowitz, Josh (May 1, 2015). "Joss Whedon Explains Why There's No Loki In 'Avengers: Age Of Ultron'". MTV. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015.
 Raux-Moreau, Raphaëlle (January 24, 2014). "Joss Whedon nous parle d'"Avengers 2"!". AlloCiné. Archived from the original on January 26, 2014. Retrieved January 24, 2014.
 Szalai, Georg (October 15, 2011). "'Avengers' Producer Hints at Sequel at New York Comic-Con". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved October 17, 2011.
 "'The Avengers' director Joss Whedon teases sequel". NME citing SFX #220 (May 2012). March 8, 2012. Archived from the original on April 13, 2012. Retrieved March 8, 2012.
 Vary, Adam (April 20, 2015). "Joss Whedon's Astonishing, Spine-Tingling, Soul-Crushing Marvel Adventure!". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on April 21, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2015.
 Weintraub, Steve (April 12, 2012). "Kevin Feige Talks 'Thor 2', 'Captain America 2', 'Iron Man 3', the 'Avengers' Sequel, 2014 and 2015 Releases, Another 'Hulk' Sequel, and a Lot More!". Collider.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012.
 Lieberman, David (May 8, 2012). "Disney Announces 'Avengers 2' In Development". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012.
 Dickey, Josh L. (May 8, 2012). "Disney and Marvel's to-do list: Re-enlist Downey, Whedon". Variety. Archived from the original on May 7, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2013.
 "Comic-Con: Joss Whedon Remains Undecided About 'Avengers 2'". Deadline Hollywood. July 13, 2012. Archived from the original on March 6, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2012.
 Graser, Marc (August 7, 2012). "Joss Whedon will return for 'The Avengers 2'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 10, 2012. Retrieved August 7, 2012.
 Kit, Borys (August 16, 2012). "Disney Sets Release Date for 'Avengers 2'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 17, 2012. Retrieved August 16, 2012.
 Topel, Fred (September 12, 2012). "TIFF Interview: Joss Whedon on Much Ado About Nothing and 'S.H.I.E.L.D.'". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on September 14, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012.
 Hodgson, Jeffrey (September 10, 2012). ""Avengers" director Whedon swaps superheroes for Shakespeare". Reuters. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012.
 Jensen, Jeff (December 4, 2012). "EW's Entertainers of the Year: Joss Whedon on how 'The Avengers' exposed his angry inner Hulk". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2012.
 Whedon, Joss (February 23, 2013). Joss Whedon at JDIFF 2013 (video). Dublin: YouTube. Event occurs at 7:35. Archived from the original on April 21, 2014. Retrieved February 25, 2013.
 Karmali, Luke (March 5, 2013). "Joss Whedon Denies Planet Hulk Storyline for the Avengers". IGN. Archived from the original on June 8, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2013.
 Wickman, Kase (April 12, 2015). "Here's Why You Won't See Captain Marvel In 'Avengers: Age Of Ultron'". MTV. Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015.
 Faraci, Devin (April 14, 2015). "Joss Whedon Shot FX Plates For Captain Marvel In AGE OF ULTRON". Badass Digest. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015.
 Gonzalez, Umberto (October 14, 2017). "Marvel's Kevin Feige: Hulk Almost Wasn't in 'Thor: Ragnarok'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2017.
 Wiseman, Andreas (April 2, 2013). "Avengers 2 to assemble in UK". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on April 6, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2013.
 Deming, Mark (April 25, 2013). "Joss Whedon Reveals Status of 'Avengers 2' ... and Resurrection of Agent Coulson". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on April 29, 2013. Retrieved April 25, 2013.
 "This Week's Cover: 'Iron Man 3' plays rough with Marvel's top hero". Entertainment Weekly. May 1, 2013. Archived from the original on May 3, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013.
 Goldman, Eric (May 17, 2013). "Joss Whedon Talks Quicksilver, the Scarlet Witch and Iron Man's Roles in Avengers 2". IGN. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 17, 2013.
 "Episode of May 25, 2015". Late Night with Jimmy Fallon. May 2015. NBC.
 Kit, Borys (May 7, 2013). "Marvel Cliffhanger: Robert Downey Jr.'s $50 Million Sequel Showdown". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2013.
 "SDCC 2013: Joss Whedon Reveals Avengers: Age of Ultron". Marvel.com. July 20, 2013. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved July 21, 2013.
 Plumb, Ali (July 23, 2013). "Exclusive: Marvel Chief Kevin Feige Talks Avengers: Age Of Ultron". Empire. Archived from the original on August 23, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013.
 Hewitt, Chris (February 20, 2015). "Joss Whedon Talks Avengers: Age Of Ultron". Empire. Archived from the original on February 20, 2015. Retrieved February 20, 2015.
 Ditzian, Eric (July 21, 2013). "Joss Whedon Spills First 'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Details". MTV. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2013.
 Marvel Entertainment (July 21, 2013). Joss Whedon on Marvel LIVE! at San Diego Comic-Con – Exclusive. YouTube. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2013.
 Nicholson, Matt (August 5, 2013). "Joss Whedon on Thanos in Avengers 2". IGN. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013. Retrieved August 5, 2013.
 Outlaw, Kofi (November 11, 2013). "Marvel's Kevin Feige Talks 'Avengers 2 & 3', Thor 3, 'Guardians' & More [Video]". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
 Kroll, Justin (June 7, 2013). "'Avengers 2': 'Kick-Ass' Star Aaron Taylor-Johnson in Early Talks to Play Quicksilver". Variety. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved June 7, 2013.
 Chitwood, Adam (July 29, 2013). "Aaron Taylor-Johnson Talks The Avengers 2 and Godzilla; Says He's Met with Joss Whedon and Marvel for Avengers Role". Collider.com. Archived from the original on August 4, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2013.
 Sneider, Jeff (October 30, 2013). "Aaron Taylor-Johnson Closes Deal to Play Quicksilver in Marvel's 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' (Exclusive)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 Kit, Borys (August 22, 2013). "Bradley Cooper in Talks to Voice Rocket Raccoon in Marvel's 'Guardians of the Galaxy'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2013.
 Cheney, Alexandra (October 3, 2013). "Samuel L. Jackson on His 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Cameo as Nick Fury". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved October 3, 2013.
 Kim, Ji-soo (March 5, 2014). "Soo-hyun to star in Avengers sequel". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Retrieved March 6, 2014.
 Ritman, Alex (March 4, 2015). "Joss Whedon: 'Avengers' Sequel Was a "Nightmare" Due to Expanded Superhero Cast". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 5, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 Vejvoda, Jim (January 24, 2014). "Joss Whedon Likens Avengers 2 to The Godfather Part II". IGN. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved January 25, 2014.
 "Whedon's Avengers heading to Joburg". Channel 24. February 1, 2014. Archived from the original on April 1, 2014. Retrieved February 1, 2014.
 "Marvel Studios Announces Filming of Marvel's Avengers: Age of Ultron in South Korea". Marvel.com. February 18, 2014. Archived from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2014.
 Sapa (February 10, 2014). "'Avengers' filming postponed, roads not closed". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on February 10, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014.
 Cox, Anna (February 10, 2014). "Road closures as Avengers roll into Joburg". Independent Online. Archived from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved February 11, 2014.
 Silman, Anna (March 18, 2014). "Mark Ruffalo Teases an Avengers Romance". New York. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
 Larson, Jared (March 11, 2014). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Is "Ramped Up"". IGN. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014.
 Lee, Hyo-won (March 14, 2014). "Marvel Finalizes Details for 'Avengers 2' Shoot in Seoul". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 15, 2014. Retrieved March 14, 2014.
 Bord, Christine (February 11, 2014). "'The Avengers: Age of Ultron' Updates: Working title confirmed, Filming underway in South Africa, & the first Italian Casting Call is revealed". On Location Vacations. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2016 – via Forte di Bard (in Italian).
 White, Brett (March 25, 2015). ""Avengers" Fun Facts Reveal New Scarlet Witch, Hulkbuster Details". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2015.
 Riccio, Massimiliano (March 22, 2014). "The Avengers 2, primi ciak a Bard. In Valle ci sono già Occhio di Falco, Scarlet Witch e Quicksilver" [The Avengers 2, the first shots in Bard. In the Valley there are already Hawkeye, Scarlet Witch and Quicksilver] (in Italian). aostasera.it. Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved March 22, 2014.
 Kim, Da-ye (March 30, 2014). "Filming draws pros, cons; no traffic jam". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved March 30, 2014.
 "Seoul Braces for Disruptions for Filming of 'Avengers' Sequel". Chosun Ilbo. March 19, 2014. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
 Lee, Sun-young (March 30, 2014). "'Avengers' begins shooting in Seoul". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on April 5, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
 Garland, Natalie (April 9, 2014). "Avengers stars battle it out in Hawley Woods". Get Hampshire. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2014.
 Reyes, Mike (June 15, 2014). "Watch Thor Call Down Lightning In Avengers 2 Set Video". CinemaBlend.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2014. Retrieved June 15, 2014.
 Hayes, Phil (June 17, 2014). "Exclusive: Scarlett Johansson, Robert Downey Jnr, Samuel L Jackson and Chris Hemsworth filming New Avengers movie 'at Dover Castle'". Dover Express. Archived from the original on June 19, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2014.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015)". Kent Film Office. April 20, 2015. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2015.
 Couto, Anthony (October 29, 2014). "Director Joss Whedon Talks Avengers: Age of Ultron, Possibly Teases Civil War". IGN. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014. Retrieved October 29, 2014.
 Conaway, Cameron (February 6, 2015). "WATCH: The State of Our World in a 1-Second Clip". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on February 6, 2015. Retrieved February 6, 2015.
 Keyes, Rob (November 27, 2013). "'Ant-Man' Not Shooting in Edgar Wright's Homeland But Will Embrace His Style". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 27, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013.
 Joss Whedon, Kevin Feige, Jeremy Latcham (2014). Exclusive look at Marvel's Avengers: Age of Ultron. Guardians of the Galaxy Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment.
 Whedon, Joss (August 6, 2014). "Avengers 2 Wrapped What the hell do I do now?". Twitter. Archived from the original on August 6, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
 Sylt, Christian (November 13, 2014). "Disney Spends Record $580 Million Making Movies In Britain". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 26, 2015.
 Bonomolo, Cameron (May 7, 2018). "Disney's Live-Action 'Mulan' Budget Makes It One of the Most Expensive Movies Ever Made". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 Marchant, Beth (May 18, 2015). "DP Ben Davis on Camera Choices for Avengers: Age of Ultron". Studio Daily. Archived from the original on May 20, 2015. Retrieved May 21, 2015.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron". Method Studios. Archived from the original on May 12, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron An IMAX 3D Experience". IMAX. Archived from the original on April 19, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2014.
 Plumb, Ali (October 5, 2015). "Exclusive: Loki controlling Ultron? Tom Hiddleston finally explains why he was cut from Avengers: Age of Ultron". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 7, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2015.
 Chitwood, Adam (December 29, 2014). "The Gang's All Here in New 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Image". Collider.com. Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved December 29, 2014.
 Evry, Max (December 1, 2014). "Avengers: Age Of Ultron Reshoots Set for January". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on September 29, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2020.
 Gajewski, Ryan (May 5, 2015). "Joss Whedon on Fighting With Marvel Over 'Avengers: Age of Ultron': "It Got Really, Really Unpleasant"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 7, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
 Empire (May 1, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Spoiler Podcast – Joss Whedon and Paul Bettany" (Podcast). SoundCloud. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2015.
 Chitwood, Adam (May 5, 2015). "Joss Whedon Reveals Thor's Cut Subplot from 'Avengers Age of Ultron'". Collider. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015.
 Tach, David (May 11, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron's most confusing scene and the gun that almost killed it, explained". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015.
 Giardina, Carolyn (October 18, 2014). "Marvel Exec Talks 'Avengers 2' and Why the Studio "Wants to Make Movies in L.A."". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2014.
 Failes, Ian (May 4, 2015). "Casting the vendors on Avengers". Fxguide. Archived from the original on May 6, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Cohen, David (February 11, 2014). "'Star Wars,' 'Avengers' Spawn Industrial Light & Magic's London Expansion". Variety. Archived from the original on February 12, 2014. Retrieved February 11, 2014.
 Ashurst, Sam (October 16, 2014). "ILM London Launch: Updates on Star Wars Episode VII & Avengers: Age of Ultron". IGN. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014.
 Keyes, Rob (September 9, 2015). "Avengers: Age Of Ultron's Unused Grey 'Berserker' Hulk Explained". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2015.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron". Perception. Archived from the original on October 9, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2015.
 "Brian Tyler to Score 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Film Music Reporter. March 19, 2014. Archived from the original on March 20, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
 Graser, Marc (July 24, 2014). "'Star Wars,' 'Superman' Inspire New 'Avengers' Score". Variety. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014.
 "Danny Elfman to Compose Additional Music for 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Film Music Reporter. February 24, 2015. Archived from the original on February 26, 2015. Retrieved February 24, 2015.
 891 ABC Adelaide (March 12, 2015). 891 ABC Adelaide Danny Elfman. SoundCloud. Event occurs at 0:09:13. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved March 13, 2015.
 "Marvel's 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Original Soundtrack Available Digitally April 28". Marvel. April 15, 2015. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
 Sullivan, Kevin P. (July 21, 2013). "'Ultron' Teaser And More: A Deep Dive Into Comic-Con Footage". MTV. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2014.
 Burlingame, Russ (September 25, 2013). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Announcement Trailer Now Available in HD". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
 Sampson, Mike (September 26, 2013). "'Avengers 2' Teaser Trailer: Let the Age of Ultron Begin!". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved September 28, 2013.
 Hibberd, James (February 27, 2014). "ABC to air Marvel special with 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' sneak peek – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2014.
 Keyes, Rob (March 18, 2014). "First Look At Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch & Hulkbuster Designs in 'The Avengers 2'". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 19, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
 White, Brett (March 25, 2015). "'Avengers' Fun Facts Reveal New Scarlet Witch, Hulkbuster Details". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2015.
 Campbell, Evan (June 23, 2014). "Scarlett Johansson's Black Widow To Ride An Electric Harley In Marvel's Avengers: Age of Ultron". IGN. Archived from the original on June 24, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2014.
 "Audi Returns with Marvel". Audi USA. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019.
 Siegel, Lucas (July 26, 2014). "SDCC 2014: Marvel Studios Panel Ant-Man Villain Revealed, Thanos Appears, GotG 2 Release Date". Newsarama. Archived from the original on August 7, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2014.
 Graser, Marc (July 27, 2014). "Comic-Con: 'Batman v. Superman' Beats 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' with Online Chatter". Variety. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014.
 Rivera, Joshua (October 22, 2014). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron' trailer is here: What we learned". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2014.
 McMillan, Graeme (October 22, 2014). "What's Revealed in the First 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Trailer?". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2014.
 Mendelson, Scott (October 22, 2014). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Gets 'Dark Sequel' Teaser Trailer". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2014.
 Couch, Aaron (October 21, 2014). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Trailer to Air During 'Agents of SHIELD'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Couch, Aaron (October 22, 2014). "Watch the Official 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Trailer Right Now". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2014.
 Murray, Warren (October 22, 2014). "Avengers: Age of Ultron film trailer released by Marvel after leak". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2014.
 Penagos, Ryan (October 24, 2014). "The Avengers Shatter Another Record". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014.
 Breznican, Anthony (October 24, 2014). "Despite leak, 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' trailer breaks Marvel record". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014.
 Alonso, Axel; Ching, Albert (October 31, 2014). "AXEL-IN-CHARGE: How Marvel's Big Movie Week Impacts Publishing". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014.
 Goldman, Eric (November 4, 2014). "Looking Back At How The Marvel Age Began". IGN. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014.
 Trenholm, Rich (November 13, 2014). "Samsung 'Avengers 2' trailer is Marvel's mightiest product placement". CNET. Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved November 14, 2014.
 "Guardians of the Galaxy' on Blu-Ray 12/9 with Deleted Scenes, Audio Commentary and More; Digital HD in November". Stitch Kingdom. October 3, 2014. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 3, 2014.
 Abrams, Natalie (December 9, 2014). "Exclusive: 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' to feature a tie-in to 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 9, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014.
 Truitt, Brian (April 20, 2015). "'S.H.I.E.L.D.' leads into 'Avengers' sequel". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 21, 2015. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
 Carle, Chris (January 7, 2015). "We Saw New Avengers: Age of Ultron Footage At CES". IGN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2015.
 O'Brien, Lucy (January 7, 2015). "CES 2015: Samsung Reveals Incredible Avengers Tech". IGN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved January 17, 2015.
 Silva, Marty (January 7, 2015). "CES 2015: What It's Like To Explore The Avengers' Stark Tower In VR". IGN. Archived from the original on January 8, 2015. Retrieved January 17, 2015.
 Arrant, Chris (January 2, 2015). "Next Avengers: Age of Ultron Trailer Coming Soon". Newsarama. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved January 2, 2015.
 Mendelson, Scott (January 12, 2015). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Gets A Third Trailer". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015.
 Arrant, Chris (February 3, 2015). "Marvel's Surprise, Official 'Age of Ultron' Prequel Has Wanda & Pietro Spoilers". Newsarama. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
 McMillan, Graeme (February 28, 2015). "Why the 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Poster Looks So Familiar". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 12, 2015. Retrieved February 28, 2015.
 Mendelson, Scott (February 24, 2015). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Poster Gets Comically Claustrophobic". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 3, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 McMillan, Graeme (March 4, 2015). "New 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Trailer "Unlocked" by Fans". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 6, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 Mendelson, Scott (March 4, 2015). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Final Trailer Is Unlocked". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 6, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 Sakoui, Anoushi; Palmeri, Christopher (March 9, 2015). "Disney's New 'Avengers' Film Could Smash Record, Forecaster Says". Bloomberg Businessweek. Archived from the original on March 10, 2015. Retrieved March 9, 2015.
 Wigler, Josh (April 2, 2015). "The 'Avengers' Will Assemble To Honor Robert Downey Jr. At Movie Awards – And Are Bringing An Exclusive Clip With Them". MTV. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015.
 "Watch Robert Downey Jr. & Jeremy Renner Ring the Opening Bell at the New York Stock Exchange Monday". Marvel.com. April 27, 2015. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
 McClintock, Pamela (September 8, 2015). "Summer Movie Ad Buys: 'Mission: Impossible,' 'Mad Max' Get Biggest U.S. Spend". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2015.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 6, 2016). "'Captain America: Civil War' Looking At 5th Best All-Time Opening With $176.4M-$182M, Unseating 'Iron Man 3' – Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 7, 2016.
 Futter, Mike (January 29, 2015). "Lego Marvel Avengers And Lego Jurassic World Coming In 2015". Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
 Graser, Marc (March 11, 2015). "Marvel's Merchandise Plan for 'Avengers: Age of Ultron:' 'Make the Big Bigger'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 12, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2015.
 Bhushan, Nyay (April 21, 2015). "Disney India Signs Up Record Number of Brand Partners for 'Avengers' Release". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 25, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 2, 2015). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron': Secret roles for Julie Delpy and Linda Cardellini". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015.
 Watch the red carpet of Marvel's "Avengers: Age of Ultron" on April 13!. YouTube. April 10, 2015. Archived from the original on December 6, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015.
 "Watch live: Avengers Age of Ultron premiere". The Daily Telegraph. April 21, 2015. Archived from the original on April 22, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2015.
 Kozlov, Vladimir (January 30, 2015). "Disney Moves Up 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Russia Release". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 2, 2015. Retrieved February 21, 2015.
 Tartaglione, Natalie (April 27, 2015). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Hammers Out $200.2M Overseas – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
 Amos, Jim (September 28, 2014). "Need An Extra Dimension??? Here's An Updated Imax, 3D and 4D Release Schedule..." Indiewire. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014.
 "Disney to Release Avengers: Age of Ultron, Star Wars: Episode VII in IMAX". ComingSoon.net. March 20, 2014. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2014.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 28, 2015). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Is Set To Tear Up U.S. Box Office Records With $210M-$230M Bow". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 30, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
 Barraclough, Leo (April 27, 2015). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Boycott in Germany: 'Star Wars: The Force Awakens' May Be Hit". Variety. Archived from the original on May 1, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
 Trumbore, Dave (May 1, 2018). "MCU Timeline Explained: From Infinity Stones to Infinity War and Beyond". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
 Graser, Marc (September 17, 2014). "TNT Locks Down Next Five Marvel Movies Starting With 'The Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 19, 2014. Retrieved September 17, 2014.
 McNary, Dave (March 4, 2015). "Fandango Launching 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Pre-Sales". Variety. Archived from the original on March 5, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 Jay, Jayson (July 23, 2015). "Marvel's Avengers: Age Of Ultron Blu-Ray Trailer & Special Features". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2018. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
 "'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Blu-ray Bonus Features Detailed Including Extended Scene with Bruce and Natasha". Stitch Kingdom. September 2, 2015. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2015.
 Goldberg, Matt (October 23, 2015). "'Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Two Collection' Unveiled; Contains First Look at Phase 3". Collider. Archived from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015.
 Radish, Christina (July 13, 2015). "Joss Whedon on 'Age of Ultron' Director's Cut, More 'Dr. Horrible', and 'Toy Story'". Collider.com. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015.
 Archer, John (July 11, 2018). "Marvel Studios Details 'Avengers: Infinity War' 4K Blu-ray Release". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 11, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2018.
 "Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 3, 2010. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
 "2015 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 "Worldwide Openings". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
 Tartaglione, Nancy; Busch, Anita (May 4, 2015). "'Ultron' Outpacing 'Avengers' & 'IM3' With $439M; 'F7' Fuels Up – Intl B.O. Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 3, 2015). "Box Office: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Nabs $191.3M In Domestic Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 Fleming Jr., Mike (March 28, 2016). "No. 4 'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' – 2015 Most Valuable Movie Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 30, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 15, 2015). "Box Office Milestone: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Joins the Billion-Dollar Club". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 4, 2015). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Flies To 2nd Highest Bow Of All-Time With $191.3M- Final Monday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
 Mendelson, Scott (May 1, 2015). "Box Office: 'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Nabs Massive $27.6M Thursday". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 4, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015.
 Simanton, Keith (June 14, 2015). "'Jurassic World' Indomitable, Rex Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved June 14, 2015.
 Suber, Ray (May 3, 2015). "Weekend Report: 'Ultron's Massive $188M Debut Falls Short of 'Avengers' Record". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 6, 2015. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 11, 2015). "'Ultron' Has Super Second Weekend At $77.7M; 'Hot Pursuit' Opens To $13.9M – Final Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Mendelson, Scott (May 11, 2015). "'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Joins $100 Million Losers Club". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 "2015 Domestic Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 1, 2015). "Box Office: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Set for Massive $85M-Plus Friday, Eyes Record U.S. Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved May 2, 2015.
 Papish, Jonathan (April 26, 2015). "Global Report: 'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Off To Hot Start, 'Furious 7' Crosses $1 Billion Overseas; Becomes #1 Movie Of All-Time In China". Boxoffice. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
 McNary, Dave (April 24, 2015). "Box Office: 'Avengers' Sequel Earns $44.8 Million In First Two Days Overseas". Variety. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
 Ritman, Alex (April 27, 2015). "U.K. Box Office: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Scores Biggest Superhero Movie Opening". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
 Hyo-won, Lee (April 26, 2015). "South Korea Box Office: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Monopolizes Cinemas". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015.
 Hyo-won, Lee (May 12, 2015). "South Korean Box Office: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Tops for Third Straight Week". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 17, 2015). "'Mad Max' Rides To $64M; 'Pitch Perfect 2' Chimes In At $27.1M – Intl Box Office Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 13, 2015). "Box Office: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Opens to Record $33.9M in China Tuesday". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 17, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 McNary, Dave (July 5, 2015). "'Avengers,' 'Inside Out' Push Disney Past $3 Billion at 2015 Box Office". Variety. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved August 31, 2017.
 "Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 4, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 "2015 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015) - International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on January 22, 2019. Retrieved March 13, 2020.
 "Avengers: Age of Ultron Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2015.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 9, 2016). "Why 'Captain America: Civil War' Is Poised To Be This Summer's Top-Grossing Live-Action Film: B.O. Postmortem". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016.
 McCarthy, Todd (April 21, 2015). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 22, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2015.
 Foundas, Scott (April 21, 2015). "Film Review: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 22, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2015.
 Roeper, Richard (April 28, 2015). "'Avengers: The Age of Ultron': Marvel at the humor, peril of a comic-book triumph". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on April 30, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
 Travers, Peter (April 21, 2015). "MOVIE REVIEW: Avengers: Age of Ultron". Rolling Stone. (Wenner Media LLC). Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015.
 Seitz, Matt Zoller (April 28, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Movie Review (2015)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016.
 O'Hara, Helen (April 21, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron Review". Empire. Archived from the original on November 17, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2016.
 Turan, Kenneth (April 29, 2015). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron' is full of thrills but quickly forgettable". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 1, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
 Mendelson, Scott (April 22, 2015). "Review: 'Avengers: Age Of Ultron' Is A Galactus-Sized Disappointment". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 23, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015.
 Dargis, Manohla (April 30, 2015). "Review: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Gets the Superband Back Together". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2015.
 Long, Camilla (April 26, 2015). "Avengers: Age of Ultron and The Falling". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on April 28, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
 Coonan, Clifford (May 13, 2015). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Subtitles Leave Chinese Baffled". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 15, 2015. Retrieved May 14, 2015.
 Trumbore, Dave (December 8, 2015). "'Star Wars: The Force Awakens' and 'Jurassic World' Among Shortlist for 2016 VFX Oscar". Collider.com. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved December 9, 2015.
 The Hollywood Reporter Staff (January 14, 2016). "Oscar Nominations: The Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 1, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2016.
 Longeretta, Emily (June 9, 2015). "Teen Choice Awards Pit One Direction Against Zayn Malik". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015.
 Johnson, Zach (July 8, 2015). "Teen Choice Awards 2015 Nominees: Wave 2 Revealed!". E! Online. Archived from the original on July 31, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2015.
 Maddox, Gary (October 29, 2015). "5th AACTA Awards: the full list of nominees". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on November 2, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.
 "2016 Nominees & Winners". People's Choice Awards. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved October 3, 2015.
 "43rd Annie Awards". Annie Awards. Archived from the original on December 3, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.
 Lenker, Margaret (January 12, 2016). "'Star Wars,' 'Game of Thrones,' 'The Peanuts Movie' Lead Visual Effects Society Nominations". Variety. Penske Business Media. Archived from the original on August 3, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018.
 Grant, Stacey (February 2, 2016). "Here Are The Nominees For The 2016 Kids' Choice Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved February 3, 2016.
 Mueller, Matthew (February 24, 2016). "Saturn Awards 2016 Nominees Announced". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2016.
 Khatchatourian, Maane (March 8, 2016). "MTV Movie Awards 2016: Complete List of Nominees". Variety. Archived from the original on March 9, 2016. Retrieved March 8, 2016.
 Kellogg, Carolyn (April 26, 2016). "Finalists for 2016 Hugo Awards are named". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016.
 Strom, Marc (April 7, 2015). "Joe & Anthony Russo to Direct 2-Part Marvel's 'Avengers: Infinity War' Event". Marvel. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015.
 Faraci, Devin (April 9, 2015). "Markus & McFeely Will Write INFINITY WAR". Badass Digest. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015.
 Truitt, Brian (December 7, 2018). "It's finally here! Watch the first trailer for Marvel's newly titled 'Avengers: Endgame'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
 Breznican, Anthony (March 1, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War release date moves up a week". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 2, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2018.
 Whitbrook, James (March 16, 2018). "Everything We Learned About the Avengers' Fight Against Thanos in the Latest Infinity War Trailer". io9. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Avengers: Age of Ultron
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Avengers: Age of Ultron.
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
Avengers: Age of Ultron on IMDb Edit this at Wikidata
Avengers: Age of Ultron at Rotten Tomatoes Edit this at Wikidata
Avengers: Age of Ultron
Video-x-generic.svgFilm portalFlag of the United States.svgUnited States portalDragon-149393.svgSpeculative fiction portal
Categories: 2015 filmsEnglish-language films2010s action adventure films2010s science fiction action films2010s science fiction adventure films2010s superhero films2015 3D films2015 action films2015 science fiction filmsAmerican 3D filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican filmsAmerican robot filmsAmerican science fiction action filmsAmerican science fiction adventure filmsAmerican science fiction war filmsAmerican sequel filmsAndroid (robot) filmsAvengers (film series)Crossover filmsDrone filmsFilms about artificial intelligenceFilms about mind controlFilms about telekinesisFilms about twinsFilms directed by Joss WhedonFilms scored by Brian TylerFilms scored by Danny ElfmanFilms set in 2015Films set in LondonFilms set in New York (state)Films set in New York CityFilms set in NorwayFilms set in SeoulFilms set in South AfricaFilms shot at Shepperton StudiosFilms shot in Aosta ValleyFilms shot in Chittagong DivisionFilms shot in Gyeonggi ProvinceFilms shot in HampshireFilms shot in KentFilms shot in LondonFilms shot in New York (state)Films shot in NorfolkFilms shot in SeoulFilms shot in South AfricaFilms using computer-generated imageryFilms with screenplays by Joss WhedonIMAX filmsImpact event filmsMarvel Cinematic Universe filmsMotion capture in film
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
Español
Русский
中文
فارسی
العربية
Bahasa Indonesia
हिन्दी
اردو
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
54 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 14 July 2020, at 13:46 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Avengers vs. X-Men
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"AvX" redirects here. For other uses, see AVX (disambiguation).
Avengers vs. X-Men

Cover of Avengers vs. X-Men #1 (April 2012)
Art by Jim Cheung
Publication information
Publisher	Marvel Comics
Genre	
Superhero
Crossover
Publication date	April – October 2012
Main character(s)	Avengers
New Avengers
Secret Avengers
Avengers Academy
Cyclops's X-Men
Wolverine's X-Men
Phoenix Force
Creative team
Written by	Brian Michael Bendis
Matt Fraction
Jason Aaron
Ed Brubaker
Jonathan Hickman
Artist(s)	John Romita Jr.
Olivier Coipel
Adam Kubert
Avengers vs. X-Men (AvX or AvsX) is a 2012 crossover event that was featured in comic books published by Marvel Comics. The event, consisting of an eponymous limited series and numerous tie-in books, involves the return of the Phoenix Force and the subsequent war between the Avengers and the X-Men. The 12-issue twice-monthly series was first published in April 2012, and features a storyline by Jason Aaron, Brian Michael Bendis, Ed Brubaker, Jonathan Hickman and Matt Fraction, with a rotating team of artists including John Romita Jr., Olivier Coipel and Adam Kubert.

The event was preceded by the four-issue limited series Avengers: X-Sanction by Jeph Loeb and Ed McGuinness and Avengers vs. X-Men #0. Avengers vs. X-Men also ties into the limited series AVX: VS, described as "the fight book" which expands upon many of the one-on-one battles featured in the main series, the digital series; Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite, and into a number of ongoing series including Avengers, Avengers Academy, New Avengers, Secret Avengers, Uncanny X-Men, Wolverine and the X-Men and X-Men: Legacy. The event was succeeded by the limited series AvX: Consequences.

Despite receiving mixed reviews from critics, Avengers vs. X-Men was a commercial success that topped the comic-book sales charts from April to October 2012. The repercussions of the storyline resulted in the new status quos of the Marvel Universe presented in the company's Marvel NOW! relaunch initiative.[1]


Contents
1	Publication history
2	Plot
2.1	Prologue
2.1.1	Avengers: X-Sanction
2.2	Core miniseries
2.2.1	Act 1 – "It's Coming"
2.2.2	Act 2 – "No More Avengers"
2.2.3	Act 3 – "There Can Only Be One"
2.3	Tie-ins
2.3.1	AVX: VS
2.3.2	Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite
2.3.3	Avengers
2.3.4	Avengers Academy
2.3.5	New Avengers
2.3.6	Secret Avengers
2.3.7	Uncanny X-Men
2.3.8	Wolverine and the X-Men
2.3.9	X-Men: Legacy
2.4	Epilogue
2.4.1	AVX: Consequences
3	Titles involved
4	Collected editions
5	Reception
5.1	Critical reaction
5.1.1	Avengers: X-Sanction
5.1.2	Core miniseries
5.1.3	AVX: VS
5.1.4	AVX: Consequences
5.2	Sales
5.2.1	Avengers: X-Sanction
5.2.2	Core miniseries
5.2.3	AVX: VS
5.2.4	AVX: Consequences
6	Other versions
6.1	A-Babies vs. X-Babies
6.2	What If?
7	In other media
8	References
9	External links
Publication history
In December 2011, Marvel Comics announced the launch of Avengers vs. X-Men, a 12-issue twice-monthly series featuring writers Brian Michael Bendis, Jason Aaron, Ed Brubaker, Jonathan Hickman and Matt Fraction, debuting in April 2012. The series focuses on the return of the Phoenix Force, the cosmic entity of death and rebirth, as it looks for its new host, believed to be the teenage mutant Hope Summers, who will possess all of its power. Cyclops and the other X-Men want to protect her and prepare her as if she's to be the mutant savior, while Captain America and the Avengers want her handed over to them so they can figure out what to do with her and keep the world safe from a potentially deadly fate. Brubaker described the series as "...one of those legendary ideas: What if the Avengers fought the X-Men?". Marvel's editor-in-chief Axel Alonso said "You've got two populations whose motivations are simple and understandable and defensible. That's part of the beauty of this. You're seeing a story that evolves out of 'What would you do?'"[2]

The idea of an Avengers vs. X-Men crossover isn't entirely new in fact prior to Avengers vs. X-Men both the Avengers and the X-Men had already met, clashed and teamed up with each other starting with Uncanny X-Men #9 in 1964 followed by Avengers Annual #10 in 1980, X-Men vs. the Avengers in 1987, Avengers/X-Men: Bloodties in 1992, Onslaught in 1996 and House of M in 2005. Some of the X-Men have also joined the Avengers most notably Beast and Wolverine while Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch had ties to Magneto's Brotherhood of Mutants before defecting and becoming members of the Avengers. Mystique, Deathbird and Rogue also debuted in Avengers related titles such as Ms. Marvel and The Avengers.

Avengers: X-Sanction, a four-issue miniseries published in December 2011 by writer Jeph Loeb with artist Ed McGuinness led directly into Avengers vs. X-Men. In the series, Cable learns something's going to happen to his daughter, Hope Summers, and he has been tipped off that the Avengers are responsible. So he targets them one by one starting with their leader, Captain America. Loeb said "It's a story about a father and what he's willing to do in order to protect his family. There are lots of Easter eggs that will give you hints of this cataclysmic thing that is on the horizon. But by the same token, it is a story that is really driven by Cable and what he has learned in his journey through time".[3]

The prologue Avengers vs. X-Men #0, illustrated by Frank Cho, published in March 2012, offers two short stories, one starring Scarlet Witch by Avengers writer Brian Michael Bendis, and another starring Hope Summers, the girl who many feel is the next host of the Phoenix by Wolverine and the X-Men writer Jason Aaron. Bendis wrote Avengers: Disassembled, where Scarlet Witch lost control of her magical powers and turned on the Avengers which led to the alternate-reality event series, House of M and her depowering of most of the mutant population. Bendis said in the series, "[Scarlet Witch is] faced with a situation that could either redeem her, which would be crazy awesome, or make things worse, depending on the choices she makes and the sides she takes and the moments she chooses to interact with the story... Now Hope [Summers] is the same way but there's kind of a flip: She has everything to lose. There is something elegant in the way she's been told forever and ever, 'You're meant for something, you're meant for this, do what you're supposed to do.' Just because everyone's yelling at you that this is what you're supposed to do doesn't mean you can or should, and I think everyone can relate to that, as well".[4]

In April 2012, Marvel debuted the six-issue tie-in series AVX: VS which focused solely on fight scenes. Each issue featured two stories by two creative teams. Marvel's executive editor Tom Brevoort described AVX: VS as "the fight book". Brevoort said, "It's the least essential read of AvX and yet it will probably be the best-selling. From the first page, somebody is going to punch somebody else and by the last page, somebody else is punching somebody else in the face".[5]

In March 2012, Marvel announced the debut of Infinite Comics, a format of digital comics. Marvel Entertainment's Chief Creative Officer Joe Quesada said, "Infinite Comics are a new technique in comics storytelling that is built specifically for the digital world yet in a very elegant way manages to keep the purity of what makes a comic a 'comic'. It gives readers the same feel of reading a traditional comic while also offering a whole new experience that really feels like the future of where the medium is headed." The first Infinite Comics is Avengers vs. X-Men #1 Infinite, a tie-in story starring Nova, written by Mark Waid with art by Stuart Immonen and Marte Gracia, available on the Marvel Comics app or included with the digital version of Avengers vs. X-Men #1. Quesada said, "While AvX is a huge story, we only have so much room by which to tell it. Infinite Comics will be bringing you some stories that may have fallen through the cracks or haven’t been dealt with in great detail".[6]

A five-issue limited epilogue series, AvX: Consequences by writer Kieron Gillen and artists Tom Raney, Mark Brooks, Steve Kurth and Dale Eaglesham debuted in October 2012. Gillen stated the series explores the emotional conflict between the major players left on the board once the battle dust has settled.[7]

In March 2013, Marvel Comics editor-in-chief Axel Alonso announced the launch of What If? AVX, a 4-issue limited series by writer Jimmy Palmiotti and artist Jorge Molina in July 2013.[8] The series that explores alternate outcomes to the Avengers vs. X-Men storyline.[9] Alonso said, "If you've ever wondered what might have happened if the Phoenix Force had found a different host than Cyclops, Emma Frost, Namor and Colossus... then you'll want to read What If? Avengers Vs. X-Men".[8]

Plot
Prologue
Sam Alexander, a member of the Nova Corps,[10] arrives on Terrax's home planet with a warning, but before he can deliver it, Terrax engages him in battle. The battle is interrupted by the arrival of the Phoenix, the threat that Alexander came to warn against. Terrax is seemingly destroyed in the aftermath as Alexander escapes, resumes his mission and travels to Earth, the next planet in the Phoenix's path.[11]

Avengers: X-Sanction
Cable (who was presumed dead after the Second Coming event) returns from a desolate future after having been informed by Blaquesmith that the Avengers are somehow responsible for the death of Hope Summers and the terrible future. To prevent Hope's death, he devises a plan to take down the Avengers one by one before they can harm her.[3] Cable first attracts the attention of the Avengers by shooting down a prison transport plane. As the Avengers round up the escaping prisoners, Cable kidnaps the Falcon. Captain America follows Redwing (the Falcon's trained pet falcon) to where Cable is holding the Falcon, only to be ambushed by Cable and put in restraints.[12] Next, Cable defeats Iron Man using technology taken from a future suit of Iron Man's armor.[13] Red Hulk arrives and surprises Cable, but is narrowly defeated when Cable infects him with the techno-organic virus. Believing that Cable has gone too far, Blaquesmith sends in Cyclops and Hope to stop him. Cyclops and Hope plead with Cable to release the Avengers, but are interrupted by the arrival of Spider-Man and Wolverine.[14] While Cable is distracted fighting Spider-Man and Wolverine, Hope (guided by Blaquesmith) frees the captured Avengers, while the Red Hulk burns the techno-organic virus out of his body. Cable succumbs to the combined efforts of the Avengers and his own infection of the techno-organic virus, and is brought to Utopia. Blaquesmith tells Hope that she can still save Cable by absorbing the techno-organic virus with the Phoenix Force. Once fully healed, Cable informs Cyclops that Hope is indeed the Phoenix, and that he needs his help to protect her when war comes with the Avengers.[15]

Core miniseries
In Washington D.C., MODOK Superior tries to assassinate an ex-A.I.M. scientist, but the scientist is saved by the Scarlet Witch with the help of Ms. Marvel and Spider-Woman. After the fight, Ms. Marvel invites the Scarlet Witch back to Avengers Mansion, but Vision turns her away for her actions in the Avengers Disassembled storyline. On Utopia, Hope Summers sneaks out to fight crime in San Francisco against Cyclops' wishes, where she stops the Serpent Society from robbing a bank. Cyclops and Emma Frost follow Hope to the scene, but she tells Cyclops that he need not be afraid for her safety, and that she is ready for the Phoenix Force when it comes.[16]

Act 1 – "It's Coming"
Some days later, Sam Alexander crash-lands on Earth and delivers a vague warning to the Avengers before lapsing into a coma. Iron Man deduces that the threat is the Phoenix Force and it is returning to Earth. At the X-Mansion, Wolverine tells Captain America that he believes the Phoenix is coming for Hope Summers. Captain America then travels to Utopia to ask Cyclops to hand Hope over to the Avengers so that they can place her into protective custody. Cyclops refuses, believing Hope to be the mutant messiah, and orders Captain America to leave. After a brief exchange, Captain America assembles the Avengers on Utopia.[17]

As war breaks out between the Avengers and X-Men on the beaches of Utopia, Emma Frost takes Hope inside the compound and leaves her with members of the Lights for her protection. Hope knocks out the Lights, believing that she is the cause of the war and insisting she is the one that must end it. Spider-Man and Wolverine infiltrate the compound and find Hope, but are defeated by her growing Phoenix powers. She then leaves Utopia as more X-Men and Avengers rush into the compound. Meanwhile, in deep space, Thor leads the Secret Avengers as they prepare to encounter the Phoenix Force.[18]

After convincing the Avengers that they have surrendered, Cyclops's Extinction Team escape from Utopia in order to track down Hope. The Avengers follow suit, using Rachel Summers to operate Cerebra, but they discover that Hope has masked her trail, unaware that Rachel is working as a double agent for Cyclops. Captain America and Wolverine then get into an altercation aboard the Quinjet over how to handle Hope should they find her, with Wolverine believing that she must be killed, and he is ejected from the plane.[19]

Wolverine is rescued by Hope, who asks for his help to reach the Blue Area of the Moon. Meanwhile, in space, Thor and the Secret Avengers are defeated by the Phoenix. On Earth, the Avengers and the X-Men search for Hope in Wakanda, the Savage Land, Wundagore, Latveria and Tabula Rasa. Wolverine and Hope travel to the Moon, but on the way Wolverine signals Captain America, who follows them with a team of Avengers. The X-Men arrive soon afterwards, after Emma Frost scans Captain America's mind. As both sides begin to fight, a nearly-unconscious Thor falls to the lunar surface and points out that the Phoenix is coming.[20]

While both teams fight, Hope starts to lose control of herself and, fearing she was wrong about her ability to handle the Phoenix, asks Wolverine to kill her. Meanwhile, Iron Man and Giant-Man prepare a disruptor weapon to kill the Phoenix. Iron Man uses the weapon to shoot the Phoenix, but instead of killing it, the blast separates it into fragments, which bond with Cyclops, Emma Frost, Namor, Colossus, and Magik. The five mutants defeat the Avengers and head back to Earth with Hope.[21]


The emergence of the Phoenix Five. Art by John Romita Jr. Avengers vs. X-Men #5 (June 2012).
Act 2 – "No More Avengers"
Ten days after bonding with the Phoenix, the "Phoenix Five" have started reforming the world according to their will, providing free energy, food and water to all humanity as well as ending armed conflicts around the globe. The Avengers are summoned to the White House and agree that despite their good efforts, the Phoenix Five must be stopped as their power grows unchecked. Believing Hope to be the key to defeating the Phoenix Five, the Avengers launch an operation to extract Hope from Utopia. They are nearly defeated by Cyclops, but are rescued by the Scarlet Witch. Hope agrees to go with the Scarlet Witch, as Cyclops vows that he will no longer tolerate the Avengers.[22]

During a confrontation between the Avengers and the X-Men, the Scarlet Witch injures Magik, while Emma Frost severely burns Hawkeye. As the Phoenix Five heal Hawkeye, Cyclops reprimands them for their use of excessive force, but Magik demands that they must kill the Scarlet Witch and Namor reminds him that they are at war. In Wakanda, Hope tells the Avengers that the X-Men fear the Scarlet Witch. Meanwhile, Black Panther and Iron Man research a way to stop the Phoenix Five, while Iron Fist and Lei Kung take Hope to K'un-L'un for prophesied training under Spider-Man. As both teams keep fighting and taking prisoners around the world, Scarlet Witch injures Namor. Furious, Namor goes against Cyclops's orders and leads the Atlanteans into war against Wakanda.[23]

As Namor attacks Wakanda, Iron Man takes Lei Kung to join Wolverine and Hope in K'un-L'un. Captain America then assembles every Avenger he can muster and manages to take down Namor in a hard-fought confrontation. Meanwhile, Magneto informs Cyclops of Namor's assault on Wakanda. As the remaining Phoenix Five members arrive in Wakanda, Namor's portion of the Phoenix abandons him and divides itself among Cyclops, Emma Frost, Magik and Colossus. The Avengers retreat to K'un-L'un, as Professor X demands that Cyclops cease the Phoenix Five's actions or he will bring them down.[24]

Act 3 – "There Can Only Be One"
As days pass by, more and more Avengers are captured by the Phoenix Five, and Hope's training in K'un-L'un shows no results. Several X-Men feel uncomfortable about the way the Phoenix Five are treating their prisoners. Storm arrives in Wakanda in the aftermath of Namor's assault and tells Black Panther that the captured Avengers are being held prisoner in a volcano in Siberia. The Avengers then lead a rescue mission with the help of Storm and Professor X to break out their comrades but are stopped by Magik and Colossus. Spider-Man baits Magik and Colossus into taking each other out, allowing the Avengers to escape. As the Avengers arrive back in K'un-L'un, they are surprised by Cyclops, strengthened after absorbing Magik's portion of the Phoenix force.[25]

The Avengers stall Cyclops as Hope retreats to find Lei Kung, who tells her that he has one final lesson and presents Shao Lao the dragon, the source of the Iron Fist energy. Hope absorbs the dragon's energy and manages to stave off Cyclops's advance. She falls back behind the Scarlet Witch and with a combination of both their powers, Hope sends Cyclops to the Moon. On the Moon, Cyclops comes to the realization that he will need Emma Frost's power as well in order to defeat Hope. Meanwhile, on Utopia, Magneto asks Professor X for his help as Emma Frost's rule becomes more tyrannical.[26]

A joint team of X-Men and Avengers including the Hulk and Magneto physically confront Cyclops and Emma Frost on Utopia, while Professor X fights Cyclops mentally. Cyclops attacks Emma Frost to take her share of the Phoenix force, and uses the power to kill Professor X. Cyclops then becomes Dark Phoenix.[27]

Seventy-two hours earlier in K'un-L'un, Hope takes her frustration over the war out on the Scarlet Witch, but Captain America mediates, suggesting that their only chance to win is if they work together. In the present battle against the Dark Phoenix, the allies lose ground swiftly as the Dark Phoenix starts to burn the world. As a last resort, Captain America sends in Hope and Scarlet Witch, who together manage to take down the Dark Phoenix. The Phoenix escapes Cyclops's body and enters Hope. Together, Hope and the Scarlet Witch wish away the Phoenix, but only after Hope uses the power to extinguish the fires of the Dark Phoenix and restore the mutant population. In the aftermath, Cyclops is placed under arrest, but willingly accepts this so he can begin his eventual desecration of humanity, and Captain America decides to put together a new team of Avengers in order to mend the bond between the two sides, while Hope joins the Jean Grey School.[28]

Tie-ins
AVX: VS
During the battle on Utopia, Iron Man gains the upper hand in his fight with Magneto by siphoning magnetic energy from Jupiter. Magneto attempts to counter by pulling in other interstellar objects and as a result senses the destructive force of the coming Phoenix. Iron Man then stops the fight in favour of helping others in their search for Hope. As he is leaving the scene, Magneto tells him to find his daughter, Scarlet Witch. Meanwhile, Thing fights Namor in the sea beneath Utopia, and pins him beneath the teeth of a giant anglerfish.[29]

In the Savage Land, Captain America fights Gambit, who kinetically charges his suit, causing it to explode. However, Captain America survives the explosion and manages to knock out Gambit. In Latveria, Spider-Man fights Colossus, who injures him. Despite his injuries, Spider-Man refuses to stop fighting, but flees when Daredevil informs him that Hope is not in Latveria.[30]

During the battle in the Blue Area of the Moon, Red Hulk throws Colossus in the direction of Thing. Colossus in turn takes the Thing outside the Blue Area of the Moon. The Thing, repeatedly beaten and without oxygen to breathe, is defeated. Back in the Blue Area of the Moon, Magik drags Black Widow to Limbo, but she defeats Illyana's demon hordes and forces Illyana to take them back to the Moon. However, after they return to the Moon, Magik stabs Black Widow in the back with the Soulsword, rendering her unconscious.[31]

In New York City, Daredevil and Psylocke fight to a draw as Daredevil makes Psylocke question her motives. In Ukraine, Thor shatters Emma Frost's diamond form, launching the shards into space. As the shards fall back to Earth, they rip through Thor's body and reassemble on the ground. Thor, severely injured from the shrapnel, succumbs to Frost's Phoenix powers.[32]

While the Avengers and X-Men search for Hope, Hawkeye fights Angel in Wundagore. The battle is interrupted when Psylocke arrives at the scene; Hawkeye threatens to shoot her head unless Angel stops fighting. He complies, but is still shot by Hawkeye, and later reports it to Emma Frost. In Wakanda, Black Panther and Storm fight while reflecting about their life as a couple. The fight is interrupted by Wakandan citizens and Storm's fellow X-Men; before leaving with her allies, Storm takes out her wedding ring and leaves it there.[33]

In K'un-L'un, Hope Summers starts a fight against the Scarlet Witch, mimicking her powers. After both women nearly destroy reality, Captain America orders them to stop. However, after both lower their guard, Hope punches the Scarlet Witch in the face, knocking her to the ground. Elsewhere, Havok defeats Captain America, Domino knocks out the Red Hulk, Edwin Jarvis throws Toad out of a window in Avengers Tower, Hawkeye imagines Spider-Woman wrestling with Emma Frost, Storm and Psylocke, Iceman defeats Iron Fist, and Squirrel Girl and Pixie play with Avengers and X-Men figurines, before finding out that the figurines were created by Puppet Master out of mind-control clay, one day before the start of the hostilities between the Avengers and X-Men.[34]

Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite
Sam Alexander travels to Earth at hyperspeed to warn Earth heroes that the Phoenix is coming before it reaches the planet. Due to lack of experience, he is unable to slow down when reaching Earth and crash lands in New York. Nova is rescued by the Avengers, but is unable to explain what is coming before passing out.[35]

After the Phoenix Five restructured Utopia, Cyclops's mind is overcome by all the thoughts in the island and he goes to the Blue Area of the Moon in search for a quiet place. There, he remembers Jean Grey's sacrifice and creates a dust replica of Jean to discuss his situation. She points out that he cannot let the Phoenix make him lose touch with his humanity, and he heads back to Earth deciding that he needs to preserve the man that he has always been, not letting the Phoenix change him.[36]

In K'un-L'un, Iron Man and Beast develop a mechanism fed by the Scarlet Witch's hex powers, which use her inner thoughts to consider all the data gathered on the Phoenix Five and the Avengers, in order to figure out their best scenarios to overcome the X-Men. The mechanism comes up with three scenarios, consisting of Iron Man, Thor and Wolverine, but all three end with Cyclops defeating his opponent. However, as Hope enters the room and the Scarlet Witch sees her, a new scenario appears, in which Cyclops is defeated, making Iron Man realize her crucial role in the battlefield.[37]

Avengers
Following the defeat of Norman Osborn and his Dark Avengers, Noh-Varr locates a secret A.I.M. base. The Avengers take out the base and arrest Monica Rappaccini and the rest of the A.I.M. scientists that escaped following Osborn's defeat. After the battle, Noh-Varr checks in with the Supreme Intelligence of the Kree Empire who informs him of the coming Phoenix force and orders him to intercept and contain it at all cost... even if it means eliminating his Avenger teammates.[38] In space, after the Avengers fail to stop the Phoenix, Noh-Varr analyzes the reason for their failure and discovers that Thor's hammer can injure and absorb the Phoenix's essence. Thor (equipped with Beast's device to contain the Phoenix) is able to force it away from Earth. Before the team can celebrate, Noh-Varr declares that he will take the collected energy back to the Kree.[39] While the Avengers wake up in their spaceship heading to a sun and try to escape death, Noh-Varr takes the Phoenix energy to the Supreme Intelligence; however, after the Intelligence declares that the energy will not be used to save Earth, Noh-Varr turns against it and escapes with the energy. The Avengers meet him, take the energy, and declare him an enemy of the team telling him never to return to Earth. Noh-Varr is left in Hala running for his life from the Kree.[40]

Considering the Phoenix Five a threat to Earth, Red Hulk decides to invade Utopia by himself and assassinate Cyclops. He is discovered by Emma Frost and confronted by several X-Men. Instead of imprisoning or murdering him, Cyclops sends Red Hulk back to the Avengers with an "X" carved in his chest. Nevertheless, Red Hulk considers that Cyclops lost the war the moment he spared his life.[41] In Indonesia, Rachel leads a group of X-Men in a fight against Wolverine and the Avengers. Rachel finds Hope, but her mind is drawn to the psychic plane, where she meets Professor X. After realizing that he was just keeping her busy to give the Avengers an advantage, Rachel engages him in a psychic battle, knocking everyone out, except Spider-Woman and Professor X. Later, he states that he cannot fight his own students and erases his presence in the battle from everyone's minds.[42]

A S.H.I.E.L.D. facility is invaded by Mister Negative and his henchmen, taking advantage of the war between the Avengers and the Phoenix Five, but Hawkeye and Spider-Woman defeat them while having a discussion about their relationship. It is later revealed that they were informed about Mister Negative's plan by Madame Hydra, who wanted to get rid of her competition.[43]

Avengers Academy
The Avengers bring the mutant children left behind by the X-Men after the battle on Utopia to the Avengers Academy to keep them from interfering in the war. Hercules organizes a sports competition between the Academy students and the mutants to ease tensions between the groups, but after a while the mutants choose to exclude themselves. Meanwhile, Sebastian Shaw breaks out of his holding cell and goes on a rampage.[44] Hercules, Tigra and Madison Jeffries try to stop him, but are quickly defeated. Elsewhere, X-23 tries to decide whether she should join with her former friends from Utopia or her current friends at the Avengers Academy. After talking to Finesse, she witnesses the young mutants from Utopia, now joined by Ricochet, Wiz Kid and Hollow, confronting the Academy students. When Juston Seyfert and his Sentinel try to stop the young mutants, X-23 attacks the Sentinel and forces it to retreat, deciding that the young mutants should not be deprived of their free will to leave the Academy if they want to. Shortly after this, Shaw appears to the teenagers.[45] Before a battle between both parties can become serious, X-23 and Finesse warn their friends that Shaw's body language indicates he does not mean to hurt anyone, but wants to help the mutant children escape. After both sides agree that the mutant children shouldn't be confined against their will, Tigra suggests to fake a battle in order to justify their escape in front of the cameras at the Academy. After the fake battle, Surge and Dust invite X-23 to join them, but she declines. The young mutants leave, but Loa decides to stay at the Academy.[46]

After the Phoenix Five return to Earth and start to reform the world, X-23 feels that Seyfert's Sentinel should be destroyed, as it still has the directive to exterminate mutants, but he argues that this directive isn't its primary one, and that it learned to overcome it. As Emma Frost destroys Sentinels all over the world, she eventually arrives at the Academy and demands to either destroy the Sentinel or have its programming erased. Juston refuses, arguing that it would be like erasing the individual that his Sentinel has become; Giant-Man, X-23 and the other students decide that he is right and attack Emma.[47] As the Academy staff and students fight Emma Frost, both sides discuss the ethics in her attempt to destroy Juston's Sentinel. Finesse asks for Quicksilver's help, but he refuses, stating that Sentinels only exist as mutant-killing machines; nevertheless, instants after Emma destroys Juston's Sentinel, Quicksilver replaces its central processing core with the one from another robot, thus saving the Sentinel's "life" and memories. After Emma leaves the Academy, Giant-Man and Tigra announce that the Academy will be closed, to keep the students away from the war between Avengers and X-Men.[48]

New Avengers
Jessica Jones returns to Avengers Mansion with her baby after going into hiding because of death threats made by Norman Osborn. Jessica tells Luke Cage that she no longer feels that the mansion is safe for their daughter and asks him to leave with her but Luke retorts that they will not be safe anywhere. The argument is interrupted by the arrival of Captain America who explains the impending threat of the Phoenix and war with X-Men. Jessica then leaves the mansion while Luke heads off to Utopia with the Avengers to confront the X-Men.[49]

Centuries ago, the Yu-Ti Nu-An had a recurring dream associating a red-haired girl with the Phoenix and a dragon. He later finds a matching red-haired girl named Fongji in the streets of K'un-L'un and has her trained as the Iron Fist. In the present, as Lei Kung reads this account, Nu-An tells him that those records have been sealed until the Phoenix returns and now he must teach Iron Fist what to do.[50] In the past, Nu-An asks for Leonardo da Vinci to come to K'un-L'un in order to help protect the world against the Phoenix's arrival; meanwhile, Fongji is submitted to a hard training, eventually manifesting the Phoenix powers. Nu-An orders her to battle the dragon Shao-Lao as established by the ritual of the Iron Fist. Fongji is successful in her test and becomes the Iron Fist, shortly before Da Vinci sees the Phoenix coming towards Earth.[51] Fongji is able to bond with the Phoenix and remain in control of herself, but she feels that Earth is still not ready for its evolution and departs. In the present time, Daniel Rand (the current Iron Fist) tells Fongji's story to Hope and she is taken to the current Yu-Ti (whose visions indicate that she must be trained by Spider-Man). Spider-Man teaches Hope that "with great power, there must also come great responsibility" and makes her reflect about this as the potential Phoenix host.[52]

After being imprisoned in the X-Brig, Luke Cage, Spider-Woman and Hawkeye try to escape. After getting out of their cells and defeating many X-Men, they manage to escape Utopia - only to find out that all the action happened in their minds, as they are still imprisoned in Danger's virtual reality program.[53] Meanwhile, Captain America arranges another meeting of the Illuminati in an attempt to talk with Namor after he is possessed by the Phoenix Force, but the meeting quickly falls apart; Professor X resents how the other four members are subconsciously blaming him for the current mess, Mister Fantastic feels that the Phoenix Five are not actually doing anything wrong, and Doctor Strange and Iron Man feel that the meeting is pointless as they doubt that Namor will appear. When Namor arrives after the others have left, Captain America asks him to stand down, but Namor refuses, acknowledging that he still respects Captain as a friend and ally.[54]

After the battle against the Phoenix is over, a group of New Avengers transport Emma Frost to a prison, but their vehicle is attacked by a group of Purifiers, eager to assassinate her. While being attacked by the Purifiers, Luke Cage thinks about his wife and daughter, and fights back. After the Purifiers are taken down and other Avengers arrive at the scene, Cage calls Jessica Jones, while Daredevil explains that Luke has just quit the Avengers.[55]

Secret Avengers
Thor and the Secret Avengers try to capture the Phoenix in space but are defeated. Meanwhile, a group of Kree priests attempt to resurrect Captain Marvel using a shard of the M'Kraan Crystal, an act that draws the Phoenix away. The Secret Avengers then travel to Hala (the Kree homeworld) to regroup and encounter the resurrected Captain Marvel.[56] Mar-Vell, Ms. Marvel and Noh-Varr attack the other Secret Avengers, capturing part of the team. The Vision discovers that a signal is being transmitted that is controlling all the Kree people, including the three Kree-related heroes, as Krees related to Mar-Vell impersonate the Supreme Intelligence and declare to the Kree people that the Phoenix coming to Hala will bring evolution to the worthy. The remaining Secret Avengers try to free the Kree from the mind control, but are defeated by Captain Marvel. After capturing them, Mar-Vell sees the Kree soldiers killing the people who were freed from mind control and tries to escape.[57] After the Vision frees Mar-Vell, Ms. Marvel and Noh-Varr from the mind control, and after the Krees posing as the Supreme Intelligence kill themselves, the Secret Avengers fight to take the Phoenix away from Hala. Mar-Vell eventually realizes that the Phoenix is after the fragment used to revive him, and after telling Ms. Marvel that she is no longer under his shadow, he willingly allows it to remove the fragment, killing him in the process.[58]

Uncanny X-Men
Cyclops listens to Doctor Nemesis's report that Hope's latest flare up of the Phoenix force would be noticed and prepares a contingency plan. At the same time, UNIT advises Hope that she must choose her own destiny. Later during the fight between Colossus and Red Hulk, Colossus loses control of his Juggernaut powers and damages the pillar that holds up Utopia. Colossus then forfeits his Juggernaut powers, resulting in his defeat. After Colossus's defeat, Cyclops orders Kate Kildare, his public relations specialist, to send an email warning all humanity that they will pay for the Avengers actions.[59] After the X-Men escape from Utopia, Cyclops defines which X-Men will go to each of the five locations where Hope may be hidden. As Namor, Sunspot and Hepzibah are sent to Tabula Rasa, they come across Luke Cage, Thing and She-Hulk and a battle ensues. Eventually, only Namor and the Thing are still standing, but their fight is interrupted by the Apex's Savage. Afterwards, Magik teleports Namor away, to take him alongside Cyclops's Extinction Team to the Blue Area of the Moon.[60] On Earth, after the battles around the world, Magneto and Psylocke meet Storm and an unconscious Doctor Nemesis at one of their hideouts. While they ponder whether they should go to the Moon to help Cyclops, the Lights escape from the Avengers Academy and go to Utopia, as Hope left them a note telling them to look for UNIT. UNIT explains to the kids that the Scarlet Witch's spell of "No more mutants" angered the Phoenix, and that in other planet he witnessed the Phoenix host needing its five acolytes to calm it and succeed in bringing evolution; however, he omitted such information from Hope because he wants to witness what would happen if the host doesn't have its acolytes to succeed in controlling the Phoenix. Danger, controlled by UNIT, knocks the kids out and erases their memories about the conversation. As Magneto, Storm and Psylocke prepare to go to the Moon, Psylocke suffers a momentary psychic breakdown, at the same moment that the Phoenix bonds with the Extinction Team.[61]

While the Avengers and the X-Men fought each other, Mister Sinister has built his own city (based on Victorian-era London) in the Moloids' tunnels in Subterranea. The city is inhabited solely by clones of himself. After disposing of a rebel clone, he explains to one of his other clones that he has foreseen that the Phoenix Force would come after Hope, that the Avengers would try to stop it and clash against the X-Men, resulting in the Phoenix Five. He also knows that the Phoenix Five will soon come after him and intends to take the Phoenix energy away from them by using a group of Madelyne Pryor clones.[62] Colossus tries to get rid of Cyttorak's possession but fails; afterwards, during a meeting of the Extinction Team, the Phoenix Five reveal to Magneto, Storm, Psylocke and Danger (still controlled by UNIT) that Sinister is the one who told Hope about the Phoenix force, and ponder on the danger that his goals may represent to the world. The Phoenix Five leave their teammates behind and track Sinister to Anchorage, Alaska (Cyclops's birthplace), finding out that he built his city underneath it. Sinister then orders his clones to enter into war against the Phoenix Five.[63] One by one, the Phoenix Five members are taken down by Sinister's cloned creatures, including a cloned Krakoa, until only Cyclops remains. He is eventually defeated by the Madelyne Pryor clones; shortly after, Magneto, Storm, Psylocke and Danger arrive at Mister Sinister's city and find out that their teammates were captured.[64] As the Extinction Team tries to figure out a way of rescuing the Phoenix Five, UNIT suggests that Danger infiltrates Sinister's castle and let him get a closer look at the machinery of the clones. While Storm and Magneto fight the clones, Psylocke and Danger enter the castle; although both are discovered; Emma uses the opportunity to convince the Phoenix to fight back against Sinister's domination. The Phoenix Force eventually burns away the Madelyne clones and frees the Phoenix Five, who incinerate Mister Sinister and his whole city, declaring to their teammates that the world is safe... and theirs.[65]

Cyclops and Emma Frost have a psychic dinner and conversation while their bodies fight against the combined force of Avengers and X-Men, both noticing how each other is losing touch of her/his humanity. Meanwhile, Colossus and Magik escape captivity; while Piotr expresses guilt over the things he did and things he wished he had done, Illyana tells her brother that she succeeded in corrupting his soul, so as to make Colossus feel the same way she did. Kate Kildare thinks about how or if she should justify the Phoenix Five's actions. After Emma confesses having a psychic affair with Namor and inciting him to attack Wakanda, Cyclops proposes a toast in their minds; however, his body attacks Emma's, taking her share of the Phoenix and becoming the Dark Phoenix.[66] Cyclops reflects about his power and his humanity during the battle against the Avengers and X-Men, until his conscience reaches the White Hot Room, where Jean Grey calls him an idiot. He lets go of the Phoenix as Hope and the Scarlet Witch attack him, and wakes up handcuffed. After Beast criticizes Cyclops's actions and tells him about the new mutants appearing on Earth, Cyclops states that he takes full responsibility for his actions and that he would do it all again if it was necessary.[67]

Wolverine and the X-Men
Beast and Wolverine are alerted to the coming of the Phoenix Force, just as Captain America arrives at the X-Mansion to inquire about it. Beast volunteers to join Captain America's team of select Avengers to intercept the Phoenix in deep space. Wolverine warns the faculty of the crisis before joining the rest of the Avengers and heads off to Utopia to place Hope Summers (the Phoenix's likely target) in protective custody. Meanwhile, on the Shi'ar Throneworld of Chandilar, Gladiator prepares his ship to rescue his son Kid Gladiator (a student at the X-Mansion) after communications have failed and reluctantly ordering the Shi'ar Death Commandos to find and kill the Phoenix's host.[68] After the battle in Utopia, Wolverine returns to the school and is visited by Cyclops, who asks Logan for help. Both men discuss their stances regarding the Phoenix's incoming arrival and Wolverine refuses to join Scott's X-Men. However, some of his staff members and Angel decide to join Scott in the battle against the Avengers. Meanwhile, the Death Commandos arrive to Earth.[69] Warbird takes Kid Gladiator away from Earth, but he escapes and engages in battle against the Avengers; at the same time, Hope and Wolverine are attacked by the Death Commandos. Hope is gutted by Flaw, but the Phoenix Force manifests within her and she incinerates the Death Commandos. Although Wolverine intends to stab her, he figures out that he is not capable of killing a child. In the X-Mansion, Gladiator arrives and demands his son.[70]

After the Phoenix Five return to Earth and the Avengers take Hope away from Utopia, Cyclops sends Rachel to track Wolverine. She takes a squad of X-Men with her to Indonesia, where Logan and some Avengers fight them. Rachel finds Hope, but during a psychic confrontation between them, she empathizes with Hope's determination to find the Phoenix and lets her go, later lying to Cyclops that she did not manage to find the mutant messiah. Before Cyclops can force Rachel to tell the truth, Gladiator arrives in Utopia with many Shi'ar soldiers and demands his son, Kid Gladiator.[71] Warbird reminisces about her past and how the Shi'ar taught her to be merciless, as she joins Gladiator, the Death Commandos and the Shi'ar troops against the X-Men. Even though Gladiator is severely beaten by the Phoenix Five, she prevents Kid Gladiator from helping his father, as her orders are to keep the boy safe. After the battle is over, she takes an almost dead Gladiator to be treated at the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning.[72] Some days later, as the staff that remained at the school faces the difficulty of taking care of it by themselves, Colossus asks Kitty Pryde on a date. She accepts, but at the dinner she expresses her concerns about the Phoenix Five losing control and criticizes the way they have been arresting the Avengers. Furious, Colossus blames the school for changing her mind about him, attacking the staff and burning Kitty's arm before regretting his own actions and leaving. Meanwhile, Iceman gets uncomfortable with the Phoenix Five's course of action against the Avengers, and returns to the school alongside Rachel and Angel after considering the Phoenix Five are no longer themselves.[73]

After the battle between Cyclops and the Avengers in K'un-L'un, the Avengers, Wolverine's X-Men and the Utopia teenagers gather at the X-Mansion. Brood helps Iron Man with the calculations for his mechanism to fight Cyclops and Emma Frost, while the Utopia teenagers adjust to the new school, Toad takes Husk on a date and Gladiator orders his son to return home with him, before telling Warbird that she will remain on Earth to find her true purpose in life. Kitty declares Angel as the school's first graduate and invites him to be a graduate assistant there, before Wolverine takes him, Beast, Iceman, Rachel, Hope and Professor X to join the Avengers in battle against Cyclops.[74] Meanwhile, two weeks after being incarcerated at Rikers Island by the Phoenix Five alongside his inner circle friends, Kade Kilgore tells the reader about his past and how he turned out to be the person he is. In prison, he incites a riot and calls a helicopter to rescue him and his friends. They then decide to move to Westchester.[75] While Wolverine leads the X-Men against Cyclops in Utopia; in Westchester, Husk quits the school staff and Kitty Pryde organizes a school dance. Broo visits the church where Oya goes, noticing changes in her personality, and finds out that the Hellfire Club kids are manipulating her mind and planning an attack against the school, aided by Glob Herman. While the Stepford Cuckoos notice new lights emerging in Cerebra and celebrate the appearance of new mutants, Broo's light disappears, as he is shot in the head.[76]

X-Men: Legacy
The staff members at the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning have a meeting, where Rachel Summers and Iceman reveal their plan to join Cyclops's X-Men in their battle against the Avengers; the other teachers opt to stay at the school to protect the students and prevent them from joining the battle. Later, She-Hulk, Moon Knight and Falcon (alongside his pet bird Redwing) arrive at the school to prevent more mutants from joining the X-Men against the Avengers. Tensions arise between both groups, and although both parties try to stop a battle between She-Hulk and Frenzy, some students try to attack She-Hulk. She retaliates, severely injuring them (inadvertently), causing Rogue and other staff members to join the battle, while Redwing calls Iron Man to Westchester.[77] After watching Iron Man easily knocking Cannonball out, Rogue decides not to contain her powers and fully absorbs the Avengers' powers; however, she starts to lose control due to She-Hulk's inner fury and Moon Knight's multiple personalities. Meanwhile, Iron Man keeps defeating the staff members, but after Kitty Pryde phases through his armor, she finds out the armor is empty, thus allowing Rogue to attack with full strength, crushing the armor. After the unconscious Avengers are sent away from the school inside their jet, Rogue decides that she can't keep neutral in this fight, and asks Kitty to let Iceman know that she will be joining them in battle.[78]

After the Extinction Team comes back to Earth bonded with the Phoenix Force, Cyclops sends Frenzy to Narobia to detain an armed militia. There, she saves a young girl forcibly married to a violent man which reminds her of her childhood, constantly beaten by an abusive father whom she accidentally killed one day while trying to defend herself. After Frenzy destroys the militia's weapons, the Stepford Cuckoos volunteer to remove all the bad memories from Narobia's citizens, but Frenzy asks them not to do it arguing that the painful memories will help them resist when another warlord tries to subjugate them.[79] Meanwhile, after Rogue helps citizens in New Orleans, she is warned of a helicopter needing her help, and finds out that Ms. Marvel invented such story to get close to her. Both women fight and discuss their points of view on the Phoenix Five; eventually, Rogue defeats and immobilizes Ms. Marvel, but she gets uncomfortable when Magik imprisons Ms. Marvel in a piece of Limbo brought to Earth.[80] Rogue regrets letting Magik put Ms. Marvel in her prison, thinking Illyana crossed the line, and returns to rescue the Avengers. However, Magik reveals that she let Rogue enter the prison as a test of her loyalty. As Rogue turned against her, Magik sends her to a different world.[81]

Epilogue
AVX: Consequences
Seven days after Namor's attack, Wolverine and students from the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning fly to Wakanda to aid in the reconstruction efforts but are warned by Storm that they are not welcome and turn back after being fired upon. Hope Summers decides to live as a normal teenager, while Iron Man and Captain Marvel search for Magneto to no avail. Captain America convinces Wolverine to visit Cyclops, who is being held in a specialized private prison created for the reemerged mutant population, to learn where his Extinction Team might be hiding.[82]

Cyclops baits Wolverine into trying to kill him, but Wolverine lets up once he realizes that Cyclops wants to die and be made a martyr. Once returned to general population, Cyclops is joined by Jake, the only other mutant inmate in the prison. The pair soon realize that all of the guards have left as three inmates approach them brandishing shivs.[83]

Iron Man offers to help rebuild the mystical city of K'un L'un but Lei Kung turns him down and suggests that Iron Man focus on coming to terms with his own internal struggle of science and mysticism. At the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning, Magik informs Storm of Colossus's whereabouts, while Hope adjusts to life at a normal high school but still feels the need to search for Cable. In prison, Cyclops easily defeats his three attackers, due to his martial arts training, and rejects an offer to break him out, choosing instead to remain a political prisoner and not becoming a common criminal.[84]

Storm locates Colossus in Siberia, but decides not to turn him in because of the guilt he is suffering. Magneto arrives shortly afterwards and informs Storm, that he also has decided to leave Colossus alone. In prison, Cyclops allows Iron Man to study him for remaining effects of the Phoenix Force. As he is leaving, Jake is murdered by other inmates, prompting Cyclops to take up the earlier offer to break him out of prison.[85]

Magneto, Magik and Danger break Cyclops out of prison but not before Cyclops has Magik send Jake's murderers to limbo and has Danger disfigure the warden's face. The Avengers arrive to find the prison abandoned except for the prison warden, who delivers a message from Cyclops to Wolverine, stating that he will support Wolverine's school and continue to fight for mutant rights. Meanwhile, Hope's search for Cable has gone futile but Cable appears to let Hope know that she need not continue to search for him and that he will be there for her when she needs him.[86]

Titles involved
Title	Issue(s)
Prologue
Avengers: X-Sanction	#1-4
Marvel Point One	#1
Avengers vs X-Men	#0
Core miniseries
Avengers vs X-Men	#1-12
Tie-ins
AVX: VS	#1-6
Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite	#1, #6, #10
Avengers	#25-30
Avengers Academy	#29–33
New Avengers	#24-30
Secret Avengers	#26-28
Uncanny X-Men (vol. 2)	#11-20
Wolverine & the X-Men	#9-16, #18
X-Men: Legacy	#266–270
Epilogue
AVX: Consequences	#1-5
Other
Avengers Vs. X-Men: Program	#1
A-Babies vs. X-Babies	#1
What If... Avengers vs. X-Men	#1-4
Iron Man (Marvel NOW!)	#6-8[87]
Collected editions
The stories are collected into the following volumes:

Title	Material collected	ISBN
Avengers vs. X-Men Hardcover	Avengers vs. X-Men #0–12, AvX: VS #1–6, Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite #1, 6, 10, Material from Marvel Point One	978-0785163176
Avengers vs. X-Men Companion	Avengers Academy #29-33; Secret Avengers #26-28; Avengers #25-30; New Avengers #24-30; X-Men Legacy #266-270; Wolverine & The X-Men #9-16, 18; Uncanny X-Men #11-20; AVX: Consequences #1-5; A-Babies VS. X-Babies #1	978-0785168515
Avengers vs. X-Men	Avengers vs. X-Men #0–12, Material from Marvel Point One	978-0785163183
Avengers vs. X-Men: VS	AvX: VS #1–6, A-Babies vs. X-Babies #1	978-0785165200
Uncanny X-Men by Kieron Gillen Volume 3	Uncanny X-Men #11–14	978-0785159971
Wolverine and the X-Men by Jason Aaron Volume 3	Wolverine and the X-Men #9–13	978-0785159995
New Avengers by Brian Michael Bendis Volume 4	New Avengers #24–30	978-0785161561
Secret Avengers by Rick Remender Volume 2	Secret Avengers #26–31	978-0785161202
Uncanny X-Men by Kieron Gillen Volume 4	Uncanny X-Men #15–20	978-0785165293
Wolverine and the X-Men by Jason Aaron Volume 4	Wolverine and the X-Men #14–17	978-0785165422
Avengers by Brian Michael Bendis Volume 4	Avengers #25–30	978-0785160793
Avengers vs. X-Men: Avengers	Avengers Academy #29-33, Secret Avengers #26–28	978-0785165811
Avengers vs. X-Men: X-Men Legacy	X-Men Legacy #266–275	978-0785165873
Avengers: X-Sanction	Avengers: X-Sanction #1-4	978-0785158639
Reception
Critical reaction
Avengers: X-Sanction
Avengers: X-Sanction
Comic Book Resources	IGN
Issue	Rating
1	4/5 stars	6.5/10
2	3.5/5 stars	5.5/10
3	2.5/5 stars	6.5/10
4	4/5 stars	5.5/10
Comic Book Resources gave the first issue four out of five stars, issue #2 three and a half stars, issue #3 two and a half stars and issue #4 four stars. Overall stating that "This series may have had its detractors, but it delivers a complete story acting as a concise set-up for Avengers Vs. X-Men and it has plenty of fun in the process. Sides aren't drawn here, but the causes worth fighting for are defined. From here, Loeb and McGuiness turn it over to other creators for AvX. Their interpretation of Cable's journey is complete and they had a blast bringing that tale to light, something that particularly shines through in this closing chapter".[88][89][90][91]

IGN gave issue #1 a 6.5 out of 10, issue #2 a 5.5, issue #3 a 6.5 and issue #4 a 5.5. IGN's consensus is "If it was big, dumb action you craved, X-Sanction delivers well enough. If it was teases and revelations for AvX, it offers a few morsels. But in the end, even a humble four issues seemed too long for the meager conflict. Trade-waiters may be better off skipping this book entirely and moving straight ahead to AvX #0 next week".[92][93][94][95]

Core miniseries
Core miniseries
CBR	IGN	Newsarama
Issue	Rating
0	4.5/5 stars	7.0/10	9/10
1	4/5 stars	7.0/10	7/10
2	4.5/5 stars	5.0/10	9/10
3	3/5 stars	5.5/10	5/10
4	3.5/5 stars	6.5/10	8/10
5	2.5/5 stars	6.5/10	5/10
6	4/5 stars	8.5/10	7/10
7	3/5 stars	7.5/10	N/A
8	4/5 stars	7.5/10	6/10
9	4/5 stars	8.5/10	9/10
10	3.5/5 stars	5.5/10	5/10
11	2/5 stars	7.5/10	8/10
12	3.5/5 stars	6.9/10	N/A
Act 1 – "It's Coming"
Comic Book Resources gave issue 0 four and half stars out of five, stating that "...It's tough not to judge zero issues, preludes and prologues as anything more than gimmicks. Typically, they're used as a chance to give a story two "first" issues and are either completely disposable or deceptively essential but with "AvX" #0, Marvel has found the right middle ground", while giving credit to writers Brian Michael Bendis, Jason Aaron and artist Frank Cho.[96] They gave issue #1 four stars, again praising Bendis' writing but felt John Romita Jr.'s art to be "a bit inconsistent", explaining "The storytelling is good and he handles the large cast very well, but there are places where the art feels very thin on detail".[97] CBR gave the second issue four and a half stars, writing "This second issue is a comic book hero versus hero slugfest the likes of which we haven't seen since Civil War. Jason Aaron and John Romita Jr. choreograph a fight like a pair of kids with access to the world's biggest action figure toybox and it's magnificent."[98] Issue #3 was given three stars with the criticism that it "is a nice looking comic that ultimately serves as little more than set-up for future fight scenes".[99] CBR's Doug Zawisza gave issue #4 three and a half stars and praised for Romita Jr's artwork, "The art seems to be John Romita Jr.'s brightest moments in this series to this point".[100] Zawisza gave issue #5 two and a half star, marking a low-point in the series saying that it "#5 comes in very tired, but the issue buzzes about with the fury of a second wind before completely passing out in sheer exhaustion.[101]

Jesse Schedeen of IGN gave issue #0 a 7.0 out of 10 stating "In the end, both halves of the issue are enjoyable (the first one a little more so). However, the issue comes up a bit lacking when it comes to ambition or a dramatic build-up to the main event".[102] Issue #1 was also given a 7.0, comparing the event to Civil War while criticizing the portrayal of Cyclops.[103] Schedeen gave issue #2 a 5.0, carping that "Romita's work seems rushed" and "Aaron's distinctive voice is toned down to the point where the shift away from Brian Michael Bendis' script is far less noticeable than might be expected".[104] Schedeen handed issue #3 a 5.5 and stated that like Aaron's work in issue #2, "[Ed] Brubaker's voice feels crushed and diminished in order to fit the mold of a dull, empty blockbuster event".[105] Schedeen accorded issue #4 a 6.5, stating that although "still a fractured and somewhat hollow event comic, AvX at least gained some traction in issue #4".[106] Issue #5 also received a 6.5 from Schedeen writing, "Matt Fraction's first issue is a mixed bag. It doesn't emphasize Fraction's flair for the quirky and unusual... Still, Fraction finds a stronger dramatic foothold in the story, and on the whole this issue manages to close out Act 1 in reasonably strong fashion".[107]

Newsarama gave issue #0 a 9 out of 10 stating that it "does less to set up the impending crossover than to introduce the players involved, showcasing Scarlet Witch, whose return in the pages of Children's Crusade was touted as tying directly into the event, and Hope Summers, whose manifestation of the Phoenix Effect at the end of X-Sanction seems to be the ultimate precursor to what's coming".[108] Michael Doran of Newsarama gave issue #1 a 7 writing that "#1 is a perfectly competent comic book mind you. The art by John Romita Jr., Scott Hanna, and Laura Martin is exactly what you’d expect from this veteran trio. The script by gang-of-5 co-writer Brian Bendis is perfectly professional. But like many first issues in events of these kinds, issue #1 reads almost like a graphic rendering of all the interviews about the event so far – i.e. it's all set-up".[109] Issue #2 was given a 9 by Newsarama exclaiming, "This issue is basically all killer and no filler, as the tense scene that culminated in Cyclops serving Captain America a nice hot slab of optic blast at the end of last issue has quickly given way to a full-scale, knock-down-drag-out fight between the two titular super teams".[110] David Pepose reviewing for Newsarama gave issue #3 a 5 criticizing Ed Brubaker's writing, "These characters just come off as dumb. Whether it's the X-Men pulling a magic switcheroo to escape the Avengers or Captain America suddenly deciding he's going to punch Wolverine, it feels like Brubaker keeps putting the cart before the horse. These characters have to move from Point A to Point B, because there's an outline that has to be adhered to... but it's far from organic, and it makes every character come off as a bit of a jerk.[111] Issue #4 received an 8 from Pepose stating "Avengers vs. X-Men #4 is fun, thrilling, exciting, and most importantly never takes itself too seriously.[112] Pepose gave issue #5 a 5 writing, "This comic doesn't really impress or insult, but mainly just exists, continuing the fisticuffs of the past few months without much in the way of characterization or development".[113]

Act 2 – "No More Avengers"

The Phoenix-empowered Magik dismantling military equipment. Avengers vs. X-Men #6 (June 2012). Art by Oliver Coipel. Coipel's artwork was critically praised in this issue.
Zawisza of CBR gave issue #6 four stars, writing "[Oliver] Coipel's art, coupled with the script from Jonathan Hickman, refreshes this series".[114] CBR gave issue #7 three stars, stating it "is full of sound and fury, but unlike Macbeth I wouldn't say it's signifying nothing. Rather, it's the soundtrack to the latest surround sound, IMAX, mega action flick. If you know what it is going in, you'll find something to enjoy. If you're looking for a thoughtful insight into the differences between the two teams and their methods, though, that's for a different comic.[115] Zawisza awarded issue #8 four and a half stars, writing "Adam Kubert and John Dell jump in for the art chores, rendering architecture collapsing under tidal waves, stunning battles scenes and lots of characters shouting... Everyone has a chance to take out some aggression and the end result is not pretty, even though Kubert makes it all look cool.[116]

Schedeen of IGN gave issue #6 an 8.5, the highest score thus far, giving praise to Oliver Coipel, "Unsurprisingly, Coipel really nails the epic and majestic scenes involving the Phoenix Five... But Coipel also nails the smaller character scenes and necessary facial work as well, leading to what is by far the most impressive and well-rounded issue of the series to date".[117] Schedeen gave issue #7 a 7.5 writing, "As with nearly every chapter of this event, Avengers vs. X-Men #7 is guilty of glossing over certain vital parts of the story in its charge forward. Even so, the series remains in better shape than it was during Act 1".[118] Schedeen also gave issue #8 a 7.5 stating, "Issue #8 offers an exciting and action-packed battle. It simply doesn't propel the conflict forward in the way a concluding chapter should".[119]

Newsarama handed issue #6 a 7 while stating, "Even though [the comic] is an enjoyable read, it suffers from feeling too much like a prologue. Yet, with so much on the page, what comes next promises to be huge. There is so much work done here setting up the next step that the story is certainly worth sticking with".[120] Pepose gave issue #8 a 6 stating, "Right now, the plan seems to be eliciting a specific reaction rather than focusing on story... this comic comes off more like a video game than a strong narrative".[121]

Act 3 – "There Can Only Be One"
Zawisza gave issue #9 four stars, praising Jason Aaron's grasp on Spider-Man's voice throughout the issue and stating that this issue was "the most enjoyable to date", also mentioning that "Where most event series begin to trend toward predictability in their later issues, this series continues to offer up surprises and twists on traditional or stereotypically predictable plots".[122] Kelly Thompson of CBR gave issue #10 three-and-a-half stars writing, "What I once feared was going to be one of the worst crossovers I'd ever read has slowly turned a much more interesting corner in the last month, and Avengers vs. X-Men #10 by Ed Brubaker and Andy Kubert continues that positive turn".[123] CBR gave issue #11 two stars, criticizing the death of Professor X and the marginalization of Hope Summers but found praise in the artwork of Oliver Coipel, Mark Morales, and Laura Martin.[124] CBR gave issue #12 three-and-a-half stars stating, "In general, the issue delivers a strong ending which resolves the story's ideas and core plot. Where crossovers are concerned, that makes it something of a rarity."[125]

Issue #9 was the second issue of the event to receive an 8.5 by Schedeen, who praised Jason Aaron's plot, stating that he "manages that all-too-rare balance of character drama and spectacle that most event comics are sorely lacking".[126] Schedeen gave issue #10 a 5.5 stating, "Issue #10 loses much of the momentum that had been built up coming into Act 3. This is one of those chapters that makes you wonder whether Avengers vs. X-Men really needed 12 issues to be told in the first place".[127] Schedeen gave issue #11 a 7.5 writing, "In terms of scripting, AvX #11 is neither the strongest nor the weakest installment of the series.... [Brian Michael] Bendis largely steps back and allows [Oliver] Coipel to go to town, making this a very brisk read.[128] Schedeen gave issue #12 a 6.9 stating, "The final issue of Avengers vs. X-Men delivers an epic but sometimes emotionally underwhelming finish".[129]

Pepose gave issue #9 a 9 writing that it "has what the previous eight issues have sorely been missing: heart. Focusing primarily on Spider-Man as the last man standing against not one, but two Phoenix-corrupted X-Men, this comic puts a face on a large-scale conflict, suddenly giving this crossover some real tension and weight".[130] Issue #10 was given a 5 by Pepose who wrote, "By the end of the issue, I feel like we've more or less gone in a circle, with Hope still being an all-powerful deus ex machina, the X-Men getting evil-er, and Cyclops and Emma both still living to fight another day. This book looks great, but 10 issues in, it would have been nice to be more than that".[131] Newsarama gave issue #11 an 8 expressing that "There's a lot to love about [this issue], even if some of the window dressing doesn't exactly spruce anything up.[132] Lucas Siegel of Newsarama wrote issue #12 "is predictable but fun, with lots of pretty, pretty art, and can actually be read fairly well as a standalone if you just want your Marvel NOW! lead-in.[133]

AVX: VS
AVX: VS
CBR	IGN	Newsarama
Issue	Rating
1	5/5 stars	6.0/10	9/10
2	2/5 stars	6.5/10	8/10
3	3.5/5 stars	7.0/10	7/10
4	4/5 stars	N/A	8/10
5	N/A	6.0/10	2/10
6	4/5 stars	N/A	9/10
Comic Book Resources gave issue #1 five out of five, stating that "AVX: VS #1 is, in many ways, the comics equivalent of professional wrestling. There are big moments of drama. Memorable images. The occasional shot of dialogue that'll make you smile. But really, it's all about seeing who wins the fights, appreciating the techniques of the characters (and creators) and getting invested in the outcome even though it's of no material consequence."[134] CBR gave issue #2 two stars, criticizing that "so far the crossover that this series is stepping away from also just feels like an excuse to see some knock-down, drag-outs between fan favorites, so the need for this title, even as just some between-the-panels fun, is severely hampered.[135] Doug Zawisza reviewing for CBR gave issue #3 three-and-a-half stars saying, "Of the three issues of AVX: VS [so far], this was the one I enjoyed the most, but it was not without flaws. This is a great superhero slugfest comic, but it's also easily forgettable and doesn't make a strong case for re-reading".[136] CBR gave issue #4 four stars stating, "AvX: VS #4 comes out a winner due to the sheer level of fun and wow factor on each page. There is no real story and both writers find a way to make this work to their advantage. The Daredevil versus Psylocke story might be a little thinner but the Thor versus Emma Frost fight more than makes up for it.[137] CBR gave the final issue four stars as well, saying "It feels like unhelpful shorthand to praise a comic for being fun, so even though that's what "AVX VS" #6 is, let's instead praise its other qualities: it's humorous, inventive and routinely gorgeous".[138]

Jesse Schedeen of IGN gave issue #1 a 6.0 out of 10 stating "AvX: VS does exactly what it sets out to do. In some ways it's a more enjoyable read than AvX itself is so far. That said, there are far better and more ambitious books you can be spending your $3.99 on this week".[139] Schedeen gave issue #2 a 6.5 and wrote, "the two match-ups this time are so random and bizarre that only hardcore fans of the artists involved need apply".[140] Schedeen gave issue #3 a 7.0 writing "[Christopher] Yost's segment at least strives for more dramatic depth, but it's still over and done with almost as soon as it begins. If meatier, more character-driven tales aren't in the cards with this book, then maybe what VS. needs is either more than two segments per issue or a lower cover price.[141] Schedeen gave issue #5 a 6.0 criticizing that "both halves of this issue suffer from some questionable characterization that interferes with rather than enhances of the mindless action".[142]

David Pepose of Newsarama gave issue #1 a 9 out of 10 stating, "Unencumbered by exposition, plot movement or character development, AVX: VS is action-figure combat at its most indulgent. And chances are, if you bought this book willingly, that's not a bad thing".[143] Pepose gave issue #2 an 8 writing, "AVX: VS #2 is, in certain ways, an anthology on steroids — even if these stories are largely self-contained and have little to no effect on the Marvel Universe as a whole, these match-ups are an entertaining platform for some of Marvel's best and brightest artists to jam together".[144] Pepose gave issue #3 a 7 stating, "With one fight feeling a little old hat and the other ready to knock your socks off, the end result of AvX: VS is still a win, albeit not the cleanest one".[145] Issue #4 also received an 8 exclaiming, "[Kaare] Andrews's story alone could be enough to justify the entire six issue series. I almost can't recommend this issue enough".[146] Pepose gave issue #5 a 2, the lowest score of the series, criticizing that "With a lackluster opening act followed by second act that needed to go completely back to formula, this issue is one ugly fight, and not in a good way".[147] Newsarama gave issue #6 a 9 stating, "Even if you didn't read the other five issues of AvX: Vs., even if you didn't read any of AvX at all, the talent on display in this issue is more than worth the purchase price".[148]

AVX: Consequences
AVX: Consequences
Comic Book Resources	IGN
Issue	Rating
1	4/5 stars	7.3/10
2	3/5 stars	7.8/10
3	3.5/5 stars	7.2/10
4	3/5 stars	8.3/10
5	4/5 stars	7.0/10
Comic Book Resources gave AVX: Consequences #1 four out of five stars, stating "With this strong first issue, [AVX: Consequences] feels like a project that's on track for a strong finish. With a strong focus and momentum already moving forward, this feels in some ways to have the drive that the parent series could have benefited from, too".[149] CBR gave issue #2 three stars, exclaming "Only about half of this book works. The first half feels mostly like bluster... However, when Cyclops begins to make his case, both for accepting responsibility and his unwillingness to take it all back because the end result is just too important, the book begins to sing.[150] CBR gave issue #3 three-and-a-half stars, writing "As a direct epilogue to AvX, Consequences succeeds where the Fear Itself Point One issues and Fearless maxiseries missed their beats -- it builds on the event as opposed to eradicating it, giving readers a solid followup story dissecting the ramifications AvX has had on the Marvel Universe's major players".[151] CBR gave issue #4 three stars, commenting that "as a de facto X-Men title between cancellations and launches, it's doing its job. And crucially, it's leaving characters in a more interesting place than where it found them, which means it's doing its job well".[152] CBR gave issue #5 four stars, saying "In AvX: Consequences #5, Kieron Gillen and Gabriel Hernandez Walta do exactly what they should: deliver a strong and logical conclusion to this weekly mini-series".[153]

Jesse Schedeen of IGN gave AVX: Consequences #1 a 7.3 out of 10, stating "AvX: Consequences proves that Kieron Gillen's post-event wrap-up is more than just filler".[154] Schedeen gave issue #2 a 7.8, writing "The second chapter of AvX: Consequences narrows the focus and picks up dramatic steam".[155] Schedeen gave issue #3 a 7.2, surmising "AvX: Consequences #3 loses a bit of its focus but remains a compelling read for X-Men fans".[156] Schedeen gave issue #4 an 8.3 critiquing "if unfocused, AvX: Consequences #4 is still an enjoyable read with some great visuals".[157] Schedeen gave issue #5 a 7.0, stating "Though visually weak, the final issue of AvX: Consequences delivers a memorable finish to Cyclops' struggle".[158]

Sales
Estimated number of units sold in the first month of each issue's release

Avengers: X-Sanction
Issue	First month of publication	Estimated no. of units sold	Sales chart position	Ref.
#1	December 2011	93,380	5	[159]
#2	January 2012	58,586	15	[160]
#3	February 2012	53,723	17	[160]
#4	March 2012	55,682	18	[161]
Core miniseries
Avengers vs. X-Men dominated the sales charts in its first months of release, and was only beaten to the #1 spot by The Walking Dead #100 in July 2012, and Uncanny Avengers #1 in October 2012.[162][163]

Issue	First month of publication	Estimated no. of units sold	Sales chart position	Ref.
#0	March 2012	134,522	2	[161]
#1	203,200	1
#2	April 2012	158,650	1	[164]
#3	May 2012	175,683	2	[165]
#4	178,318	1
#5	June 2012	186,545	2	[166]
#6	190,701	1
#7	July 2012	179,233	2	[162]
#8	174,935	3
#9	August 2012	174,357	1	[167]
#10	169,530	2
#11	September 2012	167,315	1	[168]
#12	October 2012	171,438	2	[163]
AVX: VS
Issue	First month of publication	Estimated no. of units sold	Sales chart position	Ref.
#1	April 2012	103,436	4	[164]
#2	May 2012	98,812	6	[165]
#3	June 2012	94,530	10	[166]
#4	July 2012	86,538	7	[162]
#5	August 2012	78,381	7	[167]
#6	October 2012	75,292	8	[163]
AVX: Consequences
Issue	First month of publication	Estimated no. of units sold	Sales chart position	Ref.
#1	October 2012	73,266	10	[163]
#2	62,794	16
#3	59,891	20
#4	58,522	22
#5	November 2012	58,474	31	[169]
Other versions
A-Babies vs. X-Babies
In Marvelous Meadows, as baby Steve Roger says good night to all of his teddy bears, he notices that baby Scott Summers from across the street has taken Bucky Bear. In response, Baby Steve assembles his fellow Avengers while Baby Scott brings together his team of X-Babies and the two teams fight in the middle of the street. After a series of turnovers, the Phoenix appears and demands that Baby Scott return Bucky Bear to Baby Steve. When he refuses, the Phoenix causes a giant explosion. The next morning, Baby Steve's parents find him sleeping peacefully with Bucky Bear, except now there is a giant hole in his room and a crater in the middle of the street.[170]

What If?
As the Phoenix Force heads towards Earth, the Guardians of the Galaxy manage to send a warning before they are destroyed by it. Having received the warning, The Avengers send a team into space as a first line of defense, while others go to Utopia to take Hope Summers, the intended host of the Phoenix Force, into custody. Upon arrival, Magneto, Hope, Namor and Storm discuss the situation with the Avengers. After a heated exchange, Wolverine attacks Namor and fatally injures Storm in the process. In retaliation, Magneto brings down the Avengers helicarrier.[171]

As the helicarrier falls, Hope, Magneto and Emma Frost leave to intercept the Phoenix Force on the Moon. In space, Thor manages to wound the Phoenix Force and it offers the remaining Avengers its gift but then senses Hope and merges with her instead, transforming Hope into Phoenix.[172]

Once the transformation is complete, Hope sends The Avengers back to Earth while she considers her options. Magneto convinces Hope that humans are a threat, over Emma's protests. After Emma warns X-Men and The Avengers, Black Panther attempts an unsuccessful suicide attack on Hope and Magneto. Hope kills Emma for her betrayal and sends a meteor shower to Earth, destroying major cities. Hope and Magneto then confront the other X-Men, offering to spare their lives if they join them.[173]

The X-Men and The Avengers attack Hope and Magneto. As the battle continues, the power starts overwhelming Hope and she begs Magneto for help. Magneto kills Hope and the power transfers to him. However, Wolverine manages to stab Magneto in the brain, killing him instantly. As all the others die, Wolverine is saved by Jean Grey, who returns as the White Phoenix. Jean takes Wolverine into a time bubble and together they watch as life is slowly restored.[174]

In other media
An issue of Avengers vs. X-Men appears and is involved in the Once Upon a Time episode "A Land Without Magic".[175]

References
 Morse, Ben (5 July 2012). "Marvel NOW!". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on 28 October 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2012.
 Truitt, Brian (December 6, 2011). "Marvel Comics pits 'Avengers vs. X-Men' in 2012". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 2, 2012. Retrieved June 22, 2012.
 Truitt, Brian (December 14, 2011). "Cable targets the Avengers in Marvel's 'X-Sanction' series". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 2, 2012. Retrieved June 22, 2012.
 Truitt, Brian (March 3, 2012). "'Avengers vs. X-Men' begins with tales of two powerful women". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved June 22, 2012.
 Truitt, Brian (January 6, 2012). "Fight club: 'Versus' series ties into 'Avengers vs. X-Men'". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 2, 2012. Retrieved June 23, 2012.
 Morse, Ben (March 11, 2012). "Marvel Infinite Comics Unveiled". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 18, 2012. Retrieved June 25, 2012.
 Richards, Dave (July 31, 2012). "Gillen Explores the "Consequences" of "Avengers Vs. X-Men"". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 3, 2012. Retrieved September 4, 2012.
 "Axel-In-Charge: Angela, Artist Changes & "What If?: AvX"". Comic Book Resources. 2013-05-22. Archived from the original on 2013-06-16. Retrieved 2013-07-02.
 "Marvel Explores Alternate AVENGERS vs. X-MEN Outcomes in WHAT IF? AVX #1". Newsarama. 2013-06-27. Archived from the original on 2013-06-30. Retrieved 2013-07-02.
 Harper, David (March 11, 2012). "Rapid reaction to Marvel's ReEvolution and Infinite Comics Announcement"[permanent dead link]. Multiversity Comics.
 Marvel Point One one-shot (November 2011). Marvel Comics.
 Loeb, Jeph (w), McGuinness, Ed (p), Vines, Dexter (i), Hollowell, Morry (col). "Midnight" Avengers: X-Sanction 1 (December 2011), Marvel Comics
 Loeb, Jeph (w), McGuinness, Ed (p), Vines, Dexter (i), Hollowell, Morry (col). "Dawn" Avengers: X-Sanction 2 (January 2012), Marvel Comics
 Loeb, Jeph (w), McGuinness, Ed (p), Vines, Dexter (i), Hollowell, Morry (col). "Noon" Avengers: X-Sanction 3 (February 2012), Marvel Comics
 Loeb, Jeph (w), McGuinness, Ed (p), Vines, Dexter (i), Hollowell, Morry (col). "Sundown" Avengers: X-Sanction 4 (March 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael; Aaron, Jason (w), Cho, Frank (a), Keith, Jason (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 0 (March 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Romita Jr., John (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 1 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Romita Jr., John (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 2 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Brubaker, Ed (w), Romita Jr., John (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 3 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Hickman, Jonathan (w), Romita Jr., John (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 4 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Fraction, Matt (w), Romita Jr., John (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 5 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Hickman, Jonathan (w), Coipel, Oliver (p), Morales, Mark (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 6 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Fraction, Matt (w), Coipel, Oliver (p), Morales, Mark (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 7 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Kubert, Adam (p), Dell, John (i), Martin, Laura; Molinar, Larry (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 8 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Kubert, Adam (p), Dell, John (i), Martin, Laura; Molinar, Larry (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 9 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Brubaker, Ed (w), Kubert, Adam (p), Dell, John (i), Martin, Laura; Molinar, Larry (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 10 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Coipel, Olivier (p), Morales, Mark (i), Martin, Laura (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 11 (September 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Kubert, Adam (p), Dell, John; Morales, Mark; Kubert, Adam (i), Martin, Laura; Ponsor, Justin (col). Avengers vs. X-Men 12 (October 2012), Marvel Comics
 Jason, Aaron; Immonen, Katheryn (w), Kubert, Adam (a), Hollowell, Morry; Charalampidis, Jim (col). "The Invincible Iron Man vs. Magneto; The Thing vs. Namor The Sub-Mariner" Avengers vs. X-Men: Versus 1 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 McNiven, Steve; Gillen, Kieron (w), Larroca, Salvador (a), Hollowell, Morry; Charalampidis, Jim (col). "Captain America vs. Gambit; The Amazing Spider-Man vs. Colossus" Avengers vs. X-Men: Versus 2 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Loeb, Jeph; Yost, Christopher (w), McGuinness, Ed; Dodson, Terry (p), Vines, Dexter; Dodson, Rachel (i), Hollowell, Morry; Guru eFX (col). "The Thing vs. Colossus; Black Widow vs. Magik" Avengers vs. X-Men: Versus 3 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Remender, Rick; Andrews, Kaare (w), Peterson, Brandon; Andrews, Kaare (a). "Daredevil vs. Psylocke; The Mighty Thor vs. Emma Frost" Avengers vs. X-Men: Versus 4 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Fraction, Matt; Aaron, Jason (w), Yu, Leinil Francis; Raney, Tom (p), Alanguilan, Gerry; Yu, Leinil Francis; Raney, Tom (i), Gho, Sunny; Charalampidis, Jim (col). "Hawkeye vs. Angel; Black Panther vs. Storm" Avengers vs. X-Men: Versus 5 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron; et al (w), Cheung, Jim; et al (p), Roslan, Mark; Morales, Mark; Cheung, Jim; et al (i), Curiel, David; et al (col). "Scarlet Witch vs. Hope; Plus: Eight More Throwdowns from Between the Panels of Avengers vs. X-Men!" Avengers vs. X-Men: Versus 6 (October 2012), Marvel Comics
 Waid, Mark (w), Immonen, Stuart (a), Gracia, Marte (col). Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite 1 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Waid, Mark; Bigerel, Yves (w), Barberi, Carlo (a), Gracia, Marte (col). "...In A Handful Of Dust" Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite 6 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Waid, Mark; Bigerel, Yves (w), Brown, Reilly (p), Brown, Reilly (i), Gracia, Marte; Sotomayor, Chris (col). "Hopeless" Avengers vs. X-Men: Infinite 10 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Simonson, Walt (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Keith, Jason (col). Avengers v4, 25 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Simonson, Walt (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Keith, Jason (col). Avengers v4, 26 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Simonson, Walt (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Keith, Jason (col). Avengers v4, 27 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Simonson, Walt (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Keith, Jason (col). Avengers v4, 28 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Simonson, Walt (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Keith, Jason (col). Avengers v4, 29 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Simonson, Walt (p), Hanna, Scott (i), Keith, Jason (col). Avengers v4, 30 (September 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Grummet, Tom (p), Hamscher, Cory (i), Sotomayer, Chris (col), Caramagna, Joe (let), Rosemann, Bill (ed). "Protective Services Part 1" Avengers Academy 29 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Grummett, Tom (p), Hamscher, Cory (i), Sotomayer, Chris (col), Caramagna, Joe (let), Rosemann, Bill (ed). "Protective Services Part 2" Avengers Academy 30 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Grummett, Tom (p), Hamscher, Cory (i), Sotomayer, Chris (col), Caramagna, Joe (let), Rosemann, Bill (ed). "Protective Services Part 3" Avengers Academy 31 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Green II, Timothy (p), Huet, Jeff (i), Sotomayer, Chris (col), Caramagna, Joe (let), Rosemann, Bill (ed). "What The Heart Wants Part 1" Avengers Academy 32 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Green II, Timothy (p), Huet, Jeff (i), Sotomayer, Chris (col), Caramagna, Joe (let), Rosemann, Bill (ed). "What The Heart Wants Conclusion" Avengers Academy 33 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Deodato Jr., Mike; Conrad, Will (a), Beredo, Rain (col). New Avengers v2, 24 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Deodato Jr., Mike; Conrad, Will (a), Beredo, Rain (col). New Avengers v2, 25 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Deodato Jr., Mike (a), Beredo, Rain (col). New Avengers v2, 26 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Deodato Jr., Mike (a), Beredo, Rain (col). New Avengers v2, 27 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Deodato Jr., Mike (a), Beredo, Rain (col). New Avengers v2, 28 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Deodato Jr., Mike (a), Beredo, Rain (col). New Avengers v2, 29 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Deodato Jr., Mike (a), Beredo, Rain (col). New Avengers v2, 30 (September 2012), Marvel Comics
 Remender, Rick (w), Guedes, Renato (a), Breitweiser, Bettie; Wilson, Matthew (col). Secret Avengers 26 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Remender, Rick (w), Guedes, Renato (a), Breitweiser, Bettie; Wilson, Matthew (col). Secret Avengers 27 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Remender, Rick (w), Guedes, Renato (a), Wilson, Matthew; Mohler, Jeremy (col). Secret Avengers 28 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Land, Greg (p), Leisten, Jay (i), Guru eFX (col). Uncanny X-Men v2, 11 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Land, Greg (p), Leisten, Jay (i), Guru eFX (col). Uncanny X-Men v2, 12 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Tan, Billy (p), Smith, Cam; Yeung, Craig (i), Guru eFX (col). Uncanny X-Men v2, 13 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Weaver, Dustin (p), Smith, Cam; Yeung, Craig (i), Charalampidis, Jim (col). Uncanny X-Men v2, 14 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Acuña, Daniel (a). "This Strange, Unpleasant Land - Part 1 of 3" Uncanny X-Men v2, 15 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Acuña, Daniel (a). "This Strange, Unpleasant Land - Part 2 of 3" Uncanny X-Men v2, 16 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Acuña, Daniel; Del Mundo, Mike (a). Uncanny X-Men v2, 17 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Garney, Ron (a), Keith, Jason; Hollowell, Morry (col). Uncanny X-Men v2, 18 (September 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Eaglesham, Dale (a), Milla, Matt (col). "The Passion of Scott Summers" Uncanny X-Men v2, 19 (October 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Bachalo, Chris (p), Townsend, Tim; Mendoza, Jaime; Vey, Al (i), Bachalo, Chris (col). "Day of the Phoenix, Dark Night of the Soul" Wolverine and the X-Men 9 (April 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Bachalo, Chris (p), Townsend, Tim; Mendoza, Jaime; Vey, Al; Olazaba, Victor (i), Bachalo, Chris (col). Wolverine and the X-Men 10 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Bradshaw, Nick (p), Wong, Walden; Bradshaw, Nick; Lee, Norman (i), Ponsor, Justin (col). Wolverine and the X-Men 11 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Bachalo, Chris (p), Townsend, Tim; Mendoza, Jaime; Vey, Al; Olazaba, Victor (i), Bachalo, Chris (col). "Hounded" Wolverine and the X-Men 12 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Bradshaw, Nick (p), Wong, Walden; Smith, Cam; Bradshaw, Nick (i), Guru eFX (col). "Born Warbird" Wolverine and the X-Men 13 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Molina, Jorge (p), Lee, Norman (i), Hollowell, Morry (col). "My Dinner With the Phoenix" Wolverine and the X-Men 14 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Molina, Jorge (p), Lee, Norman (i), Hollowell, Morry (col). "On The Eve of Battle" Wolverine and the X-Men 15 (August 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Bachalo, Chris (p), Townsend, Tim; Mendoza, Jaime; Vey, Al (i), Bachalo, Chris (col). "The Fires of Hell A-Glowing" Wolverine and the X-Men 16 (September 2012), Marvel Comics
 Aaron, Jason (w), Molina, Jorge (p), Lee, Norman (i), Hollowell, Morry; Rosenberg, Rachel (col). "Dance Like There's No Tomorrow" Wolverine and the X-Men 18 (September 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Sandoval, Rafa (p), Tarragona, Jordi (i), Rosenberg, Rachelle (col). X-Men: Legacy 266 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Sandoval, Rafa (p), Tarragona, Jordi (i), Rosenberg, Rachelle (col). X-Men: Legacy 267 (May 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Baldeon, David (p), Tarragona, Jordi (i), Reber, Brian (col). X-Men: Legacy 268 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Baldeon, David (p), Tarragona, Jordi (i), Reber, Brian (col). X-Men: Legacy 269 (June 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gage, Christos (w), Baldeon, David (p), Tarragona, Jordi (i), Reber, Brian (col). X-Men: Legacy 270 (July 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Raney, Tom (a), Charalampidis, Jim (col). AVX: Consequences 1 (October 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Kurth, Steve (p), Martinez, Allen (i), Charalampidis, Jim (col). AVX: Consequences 2 (October 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Eaton, Scot (p), Hennessy, Andrew (i), Charalampidis, Jim (col). AVX: Consequences 3 (October 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Brooks, Mark (p), Brooks, Mark; Hennessy, Andrew (i), Charalampidis, Jim (col). AVX: Consequences 4 (October 2012), Marvel Comics
 Gillen, Kieron (w), Hernandez Walta, Gabriel (a), Charalampidis, Jim (col). AVX: Consequences 5 (November 2012), Marvel Comics
 "The AvX Aftermath Reading Order". The Superheroes List. April 17, 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2019.
 Zawisza, Doug (2011-12-14). "Avengers: X-Sanction #1". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-02-12. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 Nevett, Chad (2012-01-04). "Avengers: X-Sanction #2". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-03-11. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 McElhatton, Greg (2012-02-01). "Avengers: X-Sanction #3". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-02-04. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 Zawisza, Doug (2012-03-21). "Avengers: X-Sanction #4". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-03-24. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2011-12-14). "Avengers: X-Sanction #1 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-01-08. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 Yehl, Joshua (2012-01-04). "Avengers: X-Sanction #2 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-01-13. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 Yehl, Joshua (2012-02-01). "Avengers: X-Sanction #3 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-02-06. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-03-21). "Avengers: X-Sanction #4 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-03-24. Retrieved 2012-03-23.
 Hunt, James (2012-03-28). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #0". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-04-14. Retrieved 2012-04-11.
 Thompson, Kelly (2012-04-11). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #1". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-04-13. Retrieved 2012-04-11.
 Hunt, Jason (2012-04-18). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #2". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-04-25. Retrieved 2012-04-19.
 McElhatton, Greg (2012-05-02). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #3". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-06-20. Retrieved 2012-06-06.
 Zawisza, Doug (2012-05-16). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #4". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-05-23. Retrieved 2012-06-06.
 Zawisza, Doug (2012-06-07). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #5". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-25. Retrieved 2012-07-03.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-03-28). "Avengers vs. X-Men #0 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-03-31. Retrieved 2012-04-11.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-04-04). "Avengers vs. X-Men #1 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-04-07. Retrieved 2012-04-11.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-04-18). "Avengers vs. X-Men #2 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-04-21. Retrieved 2012-04-19.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-05-02). "Avengers vs. X-Men #3 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-06-08. Retrieved 2012-06-06.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-05-16). "Avengers vs. X-Men #4 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-06-19. Retrieved 2012-06-06.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-06-06). "Avengers vs. X-Men #5 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-06-09. Retrieved 2012-07-03.
 Marston, George (2012-03-28). "Best Shots Extra: AVENGERS VS. X-MEN #0, AMER. VAMPIRE, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-15. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Doran, Michael (2012-04-04). "Review: AVENGERS vs. X-MEN #1: Don't Make Me Regret This". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-17. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Marston, George (2012-04-18). "Best Shots Extra: AVENGERS VS. X-MEN #2, BATMAN #8, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-16. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-05-02). "Best Shots Extra: AVENGERS VS. X-MEN, MIND THE GAP, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-16. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-05-17). "Best Shots Rapid: AVENGERS VS. X-MEN, GREEN LANTERN, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-20. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-06-06). "Best Shots Extra: AVENGERS VS. X-MEN, EARTH 2, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-08. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Zawisza, Doug (2012-06-21). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #6". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-25. Retrieved 2012-07-03.
 McElhatton, Greg (2012-07-05). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #7". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-23. Retrieved 2012-08-01.
 Zawisza, Doug (2012-07-19). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #8". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-07-26. Retrieved 2012-08-01.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-06-20). "Avengers vs. X-Men #6 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-07-01. Retrieved 2012-07-03.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-07-05). "Avengers vs. X-Men #7 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-07-10. Retrieved 2012-08-01.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-07-18). "Avengers vs. X-Men #8 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-07-21. Retrieved 2012-08-01.
 Baumgart, Jake (2012-06-25). "Best Shots Reviews: WONDER WOMAN, AVENGERS VS. X-MEN, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-28. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-07-18). "Best Shots Extra: JUSTICE LEAGUE, AVENGERS VS. X-MEN, GLORY". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-07-21. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Zawisza, Doug (2012-08-01). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #9". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-08-03. Retrieved 2012-08-03.
 Thompson, Kelly (2012-08-20). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #10". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-08-22. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 McElhatton, Greg (2012-09-12). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #11". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-23. Retrieved 2012-10-03.
 Hunt, James (2012-10-03). "Avengers Vs. X-Men #12". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-05. Retrieved 2012-10-03.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-08-01). "Avengers vs. X-Men #9 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-08-05. Retrieved 2012-08-03.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-08-15). "Avengers vs. X-Men #10 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-08-22. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-09-12). "Avengers vs. X-Men #11 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-10-03. Retrieved 2012-10-03.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-10-03). "Avengers vs. X-Men #12 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-10-05. Retrieved 2012-10-03.
 Pepose, David (2012-08-01). "Best Shots Extra: AVENGERS VS. X-MEN #9, WORLDS' FINEST #4". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-08-04. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-08-15). "Best Shots Extra: RORSCHACH, AVENGERS VS. X-MEN, PATHFINDER". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-08-18. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Martson, George (2012-09-12). "Best Shots Extra: AVENGERS VS. X-MEN #11, COMEDIAN #3, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-09-15. Retrieved 2012-10-03.
 Siegel, Lucas (2012-10-03). "AVENGERS VS X-MEN #12: A Spoiler-Filled Review of Spoilers". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-10-07. Retrieved 2012-10-03.
 Hunt, James (2012-04-27). "AVX: VS #1". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-05-02. Retrieved 2012-05-02.
 Thompson, Kelly (2012-05-16). "AVX: VS #2". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-05-19. Retrieved 2012-06-06.
 Zawisza, Doug (2012-06-13). "AVX: VS #3". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-06-19. Retrieved 2012-07-06.
 Lindsay, Ryan K. (2012-07-16). "AVX: VS #4". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-27. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Hunt, James (2012-10-03). "Review: AVX: VS #6". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-10. Retrieved 2012-10-12.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-04-25). "AvX: VS #1 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-04-29. Retrieved 2012-05-02.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-05-16). "AvX: VS #2 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-05-23. Retrieved 2012-06-06.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-06-13). "AvX: VS #3 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-06-17. Retrieved 2012-07-06.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-08-29). "AvX: VS #5 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2013-07-08. Retrieved 2012-10-04.
 Pepose, David (2012-04-25). "Best Shots Extra: AVX: VS #1, AQUAMAN #8, UNCANNY X-MEN #11". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-16. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-05-16). "Best Shots Extra: AVX: VS, SUPERGIRL, More - Reviewed!". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-18. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-06-13). "Best Shots Extra: THE MASSIVE #1, SILK SPECTRE, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-06-22. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Marston, George (2012-07-14). "BEST SHOTS Reviews: The Comic-Con SUPER-CUT Edition". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-09-10. Retrieved 2012-08-24.
 Pepose, David (2012-08-29). "Best Shots Extra Reviews: BEFORE WATCHMEN: MINUTEMEN, AVX VS". Newsarama. Retrieved 2012-10-04.
 Martson, George (2012-10-03). "Best Shots Extra Reviews: AVX: VS #6, GREEN LANTERN #13". Newsarama. Archived from the original on 2012-10-05. Retrieved 2012-10-05.
 McElhatton, Greg (2012-10-10). "AvX: Consequences #1". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-11. Retrieved 2012-10-12.
 Thompson, Kelly (2012-10-18). "AvX: Consequences #2". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-10-19. Retrieved 2012-10-18.
 Liegl, Andy (2012-10-24). "AvX: Consequences #3". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-11-01. Retrieved 2012-10-31.
 Hunt, James (2012-10-31). "AvX: Consequences #4". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2012-11-08.
 McElhatton, Greg (2012-11-09). "AvX: Consequences #5". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2012-11-09.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-10-10). "AvX: Consequences #1 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-10-14. Retrieved 2012-10-12.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-10-17). "AvX: Consequences #2 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-10-21. Retrieved 2012-10-18.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-10-24). "AvX: Consequences #3 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-10-29. Retrieved 2012-10-31.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-10-31). "AvX: Consequences #4 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-11-05. Retrieved 2012-11-08.
 Schedeen, Jesse (2012-11-07). "AvX: Consequences #5 Review". IGN. Archived from the original on 2012-11-11. Retrieved 2012-11-09.
 Mayo, John (2012-01-10). "Sales Estimates for December, 2011 - Marvel Edges Into Top Spot". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-08-08. Retrieved 2012-07-16.
 Mayo, John (2012-02-07). "Sales Estimates for January 2012 - "Justice League" Remains on Top". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-08-08. Retrieved 2012-07-16.
 Mayo, John (2012-04-10). "Sales Estimates for March 2012 - "AvX" Rules the Charts". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-06-20. Retrieved 2012-06-22.
 Mayo, John (2012-08-07). "Sales Estimates for July, 2012 - "The Walking Dead" Tops the Chart". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-08-08. Retrieved 2012-08-13.
 Mayo, John (2012-11-13). "Sales Estimates for October, 2012 - "Uncanny Avengers" Debuts Big, "Walking Dead" Leaps Into Top 10". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2013-01-13. Retrieved 2012-11-13.
 Mayo, John (2012-05-08). "Sales Estimates for April, 2012 - AvX Nabs Top Spot". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-06-10. Retrieved 2012-06-22.
 Mayo, John (2012-06-12). "Sales Estimates for May 2012 - "AvX," "Batman" Top The Charts". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-06-19. Retrieved 2012-06-22.
 Mayo, John (2012-07-12). "Sales Estimates for June, 2012 - AvX, Before Watchmen Dominate Top 10". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-09-22. Retrieved 2012-07-12.
 Mayo, John (2012-09-11). "Sales Estimates for August, 2012 - "Avengers Vs. X-Men" Tops The Charts". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2013-01-08. Retrieved 2012-09-11.
 Mayo, John (2012-10-09). "Sales Estimates for September, 2012 - DC Comics Zero Month Scores Big". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2012-11-07. Retrieved 2012-10-10.
 Mayo, John (2012-12-11). "Sales Estimates for November, 2012 - "All-New X-Men" Leads Marvel NOW! Sales Domination". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on 2013-01-08. Retrieved 2012-12-11.
 A-Babies vs. X-Babies #1
 What if? AVX #1
 What if? AVX #2
 What if? AVX #3
 What if? AVX #4
 "AvX on Once Upon a Time Season Finale". 8 May 2012. Archived from the original on 4 October 2012. Retrieved 10 May 2012.
External links
Avengers vs. X-Men at Marvel.com
vte
Avengers publications and storylines
vte
X-Men comic books
Related topics
vte
Marvel Comics crossover event publication history
Categories: 2012 comics debuts2012 comics endingsSuperhero comicsAvengers (comics) storylinesX-Men storylinesAvengers (comics) titlesX-Men titles
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Русский
Español
Italiano
Français
עברית
日本語
Ελληνικά
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 July 2020, at 05:29 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Click here for more information.
X-Men (film series)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
X-Men
X-Men films logo.png
Official film series logo
Produced by	
Lauren Shuler Donner
Simon Kinberg
Based on	
X-Men
by Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
Production
companies
Marvel Entertainment
20th Century Fox
The Donners' Company
Bad Hat Harry Productions (2000–2003, 2011–2016)
Distributed by	20th Century Fox
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	Total (12 films):
$1.67 billion
Box office	Total (12 films):
$6.02 billion
X-Men is an American superhero film series based on the fictional superhero team of the same name, who originally appeared in a series of comic books created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and published by Marvel Comics. 20th Century Fox obtained the film rights to the characters in 1994, and after numerous drafts, Bryan Singer was hired to direct the first film, released in 2000, and its sequel, X2 (2003), while Brett Ratner directed X-Men: The Last Stand (2006).

After each film outgrossed its predecessor, several spin-off films were released, including three Wolverine films (2009–2017), four X-Men: Beginnings films (2011–2019), and two Deadpool films (2016–2018), with a film based on The New Mutants comics set to conclude the series.

With twelve films released, the X-Men film series is the eighth highest-grossing film series, having grossed over $6 billion worldwide.


Contents
1	Films
1.1	X-Men (2000)
1.2	X2 (2003)
1.3	X-Men: The Last Stand (2006)
1.4	X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009)
1.5	X-Men: First Class (2011)
1.6	The Wolverine (2013)
1.7	X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014)
1.8	Deadpool (2016)
1.9	X-Men: Apocalypse (2016)
1.10	Logan (2017)
1.11	Deadpool 2 (2018)
1.12	Dark Phoenix (2019)
2	Upcoming film
2.1	The New Mutants (2020)
3	Recurring characters
4	Music
5	Reception
5.1	Box office performance
5.2	Critical and public response
5.3	Legacy
6	Home media
7	Cancelled projects
8	References
9	External links
Films
Film	U.S. release date	Director(s)	Screenwriter(s)	Story by	Producer(s)
X-Men	July 14, 2000	Bryan Singer	David Hayter	Tom DeSanto and Bryan Singer	Lauren Shuler Donner and Ralph Winter
X2	May 2, 2003	Michael Dougherty, Dan Harris and David Hayter	Zak Penn, David Hayter and Bryan Singer
X-Men: The Last Stand	May 26, 2006	Brett Ratner	Simon Kinberg and Zak Penn	Lauren Shuler Donner, Ralph Winter and Avi Arad
X-Men Origins: Wolverine	May 1, 2009	Gavin Hood	David Benioff and Skip Woods	Lauren Shuler Donner, Ralph Winter, Hugh Jackman and John Palermo
X-Men: First Class	June 3, 2011	Matthew Vaughn	Ashley Edward Miller, Zack Stentz, Jane Goldman and Matthew Vaughn	Sheldon Turner and Bryan Singer	Lauren Shuler Donner, Bryan Singer, Simon Kinberg and Gregory Goodman
The Wolverine	July 26, 2013	James Mangold	Mark Bomback and Scott Frank	Lauren Shuler Donner and Hutch Parker
X-Men: Days of Future Past	May 23, 2014	Bryan Singer	Simon Kinberg	Jane Goldman, Simon Kinberg and Matthew Vaughn	Lauren Shuler Donner, Bryan Singer, Simon Kinberg and Hutch Parker
Deadpool	February 12, 2016	Tim Miller	Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick	Lauren Shuler Donner, Simon Kinberg and Ryan Reynolds
X-Men: Apocalypse	May 27, 2016	Bryan Singer	Simon Kinberg	Bryan Singer, Simon Kinberg, Michael Dougherty and Dan Harris	Lauren Shuler Donner, Simon Kinberg, Bryan Singer and Hutch Parker
Logan	March 3, 2017	James Mangold	Scott Frank, James Mangold and Michael Green	James Mangold	Lauren Shuler Donner, Simon Kinberg and Hutch Parker
Deadpool 2	May 18, 2018	David Leitch	Rhett Reese, Paul Wernick and Ryan Reynolds	Lauren Shuler Donner, Simon Kinberg and Ryan Reynolds
Dark Phoenix	June 7, 2019	Simon Kinberg	Simon Kinberg, Hutch Parker, Lauren Shuler Donner and Todd Hallowell
X-Men (2000)
Main article: X-Men (film)
The film introduces Logan and Rogue into the conflict between Professor Xavier's X-Men and the Brotherhood of Mutants, led by Magneto. Magneto intends to mutate world leaders at a United Nations summit with a machine he has built to bring about acceptance of mutantkind, but he was not aware that this forced mutation will result only in their deaths.

In 1993, 20th Century Fox and producer Lauren Shuler Donner bought the film rights to the X-Men.[1] Andrew Kevin Walker was hired to write, and James Cameron expressed interest in producing.[2] Eventually, Bryan Singer signed on to direct in July 1996. Although he was not a comic book fan, Singer was fascinated by the analogies of prejudice and discrimination that X-Men offered.[1] John Logan, Joss Whedon, Ed Solomon, Christopher McQuarrie, and David Hayter wrote the script, with Hayter receiving sole credit.[1][3] Principal photography began in September 1999 in Toronto, Canada, and ended in March 2000.[4] The film was released on July 14, 2000.[5]

X2 (2003)
Main article: X2 (film)
Colonel William Stryker brainwashes and questions the imprisoned Magneto about Professor Xavier's mutant-locating machine, Cerebro. Stryker attacks the X-Mansion and brainwashes Xavier into locating every mutant on the planet to kill them. The X-Men must team up with the Brotherhood to prevent Stryker's worldwide genocide.

Hayter and Zak Penn were hired to write their own scripts for the sequel, which Singer would pick, with an aim to release the film in December 2002.[6][7] Michael Dougherty and Dan Harris were hired to re-write the script in February 2002, writing around 26 drafts and 150 on set.[8] Principal photography began in June 2002 in Vancouver, Canada, and ended in November 2002. The film was released on May 2, 2003.[6]

X-Men: The Last Stand (2006)
Main article: X-Men: The Last Stand
A pharmaceutical company has developed a "cure" that suppresses the mutant gene, provoking controversy in the mutant community. Magneto declares war on the humans and retrieves his own weapon: Phoenix, the resurrected former X-Men member Jean Grey. A final battle between the X-Men and the Brotherhood ensues, and Wolverine must accept that in order to stop Grey, he will have to kill her.

Joss Whedon's Astonishing X-Men story "Gifted", featuring a mutant cure, was suggested for the primary story. Matthew Vaughn came on board as director in February 2005[9] but left due to the rushed production schedule.[10] Brett Ratner was later hired as director in June.[11] Principal photography began in August 2005 in Vancouver, Canada, and ended in January 2006.[12] The film was released on May 26, 2006.[13]

X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009)
Main article: X-Men Origins: Wolverine
A prequel and a spin-off focusing on the character Wolverine and his relationship with his half-brother Victor Creed, as well as his time with Stryker's Team X, before, and shortly after his skeleton was bonded with the indestructible metal, adamantium.

David Benioff was hired to write the screenplay for the spin-off film Wolverine in October 2004.[14] Hugh Jackman became producer as well as star and worked with Benioff on the script.[15] There were negotiations with the studio for Ratner to take the helm of the film after directing X-Men: The Last Stand, but no agreement was made.[16] In July 2007, Gavin Hood was hired as director. Principal photography began in January 2008 in Queenstown, New Zealand, and ended in May.[17] The film was released on May 1, 2009.[18]

X-Men: First Class (2011)
Main article: X-Men: First Class
Set primarily in 1962 during the Cuban Missile Crisis, the film focuses on the origins of, and relationship between Charles Xavier / Professor X and Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto and their respective teams of mutants, the X-Men and the Brotherhood.[19]

Producer Lauren Shuler Donner first thought of a prequel based on the young X-Men during the production of X2, and later producer Kinberg suggested to 20th Century Fox an adaptation of the comic-book series X-Men: First Class.[20][21] Singer signed on to direct the film in December 2009; however, in March 2010 it was announced that Singer would only be producing.[22] Vaughn, who was previously attached to direct X-Men: The Last Stand, became the director and co-wrote the final script with his writing partner, Jane Goldman.[21] The film superseded a planned X-Men Origins: Magneto film, and the Writer's Guild of America arbitration credited Magneto writer Sheldon Turner for the film's story.[23] Principal photography began in August 2010 in London, England, and ended in December. The film was released on June 3, 2011.[24]

The Wolverine (2013)
Main article: The Wolverine (film)
Set after the events of X-Men: The Last Stand, the film features Wolverine heading to Japan for a reunion with a soldier named Ichirō Yashida whose life he saved years before. Wolverine must defend the man's granddaughter Mariko Yashida from all manner of ninja and Yakuza assassins.[25][26]

Christopher McQuarrie, who went uncredited for his work on X-Men, was hired to write the screenplay in August 2009.[27] Darren Aronofsky was chosen to direct the film but bowed out, stating the project would keep him out of the country for too long.[28] James Mangold was later hired to direct the film.[29] Mark Bomback was then hired to rewrite McQuarrie's script.[30] Principal photography began in August 2012 in Sydney, Australia, and ended in November.[31] The film was released on July 26, 2013.[32]

X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014)
Main article: X-Men: Days of Future Past
Set years after the events of The Wolverine, the film features the cast of the original X-Men trilogy and X-Men: First Class.[33] The story, inspired by Chris Claremont and John Byrne's The Uncanny X-Men comic book storyline "Days of Future Past", features Wolverine going back in time to 1973 to prevent an assassination that, if carried out, will lead to the creation of a new weapons system called the Sentinels that threatens the existence of mutants—and, potentially, all of humanity.[34]

Matthew Vaughn was attached to direct the film but left in October 2012 to focus on the film Kingsman: The Secret Service.[35] Singer, who directed the first two X-Men films and produced X-Men: First Class, became the director of the film.[36] The screenplay was written by Kinberg.[37] Principal photography began in April 2013 in Montreal, Canada, and ended in August.[38] Additional filming took place in Montreal in November 2013 and February 2014.[39][40] The film was released on May 23, 2014.[41]

Deadpool (2016)
Main article: Deadpool (film)
Mercenary and former Special Forces operative Wade Wilson is subjected to an experiment that leaves him with new abilities. He adopts the alter ego Deadpool to hunt down the man who nearly destroyed his life.[42]

In May 2000, Marvel Studios attempted to produce a Deadpool film as part of a distribution deal with Artisan Entertainment.[43] However, by 2004, Marvel was developing the film with New Line Cinema. David S. Goyer was set to write and direct and courted actor Ryan Reynolds for the lead role, but lost interest within months in favor of other projects.[44][45][46] 20th Century Fox acquired Deadpool the following year after New Line Cinema placed it in turnaround and was considering the spin-off in the development of X-Men Origins: Wolverine, with Reynolds being cast for the role.[44] After the opening weekend success of X-Men Origins: Wolverine in May 2009, Fox lent Deadpool out to writers with Donner acting as a producer.[47] Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick were hired to write the script in January 2010.[48] Robert Rodriguez was sent a draft of the screenplay the following June but did not pursue it, and Adam Berg emerged as a top contender to direct.[49][50] In April 2011, visual effects specialist Tim Miller was hired to direct.[51] Principal photography began in March 2015 in Vancouver, Canada, and ended in May.[52][53] The film was released on February 12, 2016.[54]

X-Men: Apocalypse (2016)
Main article: X-Men: Apocalypse
Set after X-Men: Days of Future Past, En Sabah Nur, the first mutant, awakens after thousands of years. Disillusioned with the world as he finds it, he recruits a team of mutants to cleanse mankind and create a new world order, over which he will reign. Raven, with the help of Professor X, must lead the X-Men to stop En Sabah Nur and save mankind from destruction.[55]

In December 2013, Singer announced the upcoming X-Men film, titled X-Men: Apocalypse, a sequel to X-Men: Days of Future Past. Directed by Singer from a script by Simon Kinberg, Dan Harris and Michael Dougherty, the film was said to focus on the origin of the mutants.[56][57] Kinberg said that it would take place in 1983 and complete a trilogy that began with X-Men: First Class.[58][59] Principal photography began in April 2015 in Montreal, Canada, and ended in August.[60][61] The film was released on May 27, 2016, in North America.[62]

Logan (2017)
Main article: Logan (film)
In 2029, Logan and Charles Xavier meet a young girl named Laura, a test-tube daughter of Wolverine, who is being hunted by the Reavers led by Donald Pierce.[63][64]

By November 2013, 20th Century Fox had begun negotiations for the treatment for a third Wolverine solo film with director James Mangold and Donner attached to produce.[65] Mangold said that it would be inspired by other Wolverine stories from the comic books and it would be made after X-Men: Apocalypse.[66][67] In March 2014, David James Kelly was hired to write the script. In April 2015, Michael Green was hired to work on the film's script.[68][69] Principal photography commenced in May 2016 in New Orleans, Louisiana, and concluded in August 2016.[70] The film was released on March 3, 2017, and marked both Hugh Jackman and Patrick Stewart's return as Wolverine and Xavier, respectively.[71]

Deadpool 2 (2018)
Main article: Deadpool 2
After a personal tragedy, Deadpool creates the X-Force to save a young mutant from the time-traveling soldier Cable.

In September 2015, Kinberg said that a sequel for Deadpool was in development.[72] By the release of Deadpool, 20th Century Fox greenlit the film, with Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick returning to write, and Miller being looked at to return as director, as he was working on the script at the time.[73] However, in October 2016, Miller left the film due to creative differences with Reynolds and was replaced by David Leitch in November as the director.[74] In February 2017, Drew Goddard had joined as a creative consultant to work on the script with Reynolds, Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick.[75] Filming commenced in June 2017 in Vancouver, Canada and concluded in October.[76] The film was released on May 18, 2018.[77]

Dark Phoenix (2019)
Main article: Dark Phoenix (film)
Set nine years after the events of X-Men: Apocalypse, the X-Men are superheroes going on increasingly risky missions. When a solar flare hits Jean Grey during a rescue mission in space, she loses control of her abilities and unleashes the Phoenix.[78]

The film was announced to be in development in February 2017, with Kinberg confirmed to write and direct in June of the same year.[79] Principal photography commenced in June 2017 in Montreal, Canada and ended in October of the same year.[80][81] Additional filming occurred in August and September 2018.[82][83][84] The film was released on June 7, 2019.[85]

Upcoming film
Film	U.S. release date	Director	Screenwriter(s)	Producer(s)
The New Mutants	August 28, 2020	Josh Boone	Josh Boone and Knate Lee	Simon Kinberg, Karen Rosenfelt and Lauren Shuler Donner
The New Mutants (2020)
Main article: The New Mutants (film)
Five mutants are discovering their abilities while held in a secret facility against their will. They will fight to escape their past sins to save themselves.[86]

In May 2015, Josh Boone was hired to direct and write a film adaptation of The New Mutants comic-book series. Acting as a spin-off to the X-Men films, it is co-written by Knate Gwaltney, Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber with Donner and Kinberg producing.[87][88] Filming commenced in July 2017 in Boston, Massachusetts[89][90] for an August 28, 2020 release after facing several delays.[91]

Recurring characters
Main article: List of X-Men films cast members
List indicator(s)

This section shows characters who will appear or have appeared in more than two films in the series.

An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film, or that the character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.
 A indicates an appearance through archival footage.
 E indicates an appearance not included in the theatrical cut.
 O indicates an older version of the character.
 V indicates a voice-only role.
 Y indicates a younger version of the character.
Character	X-Men original trilogy	Wolverine trilogy	X-Men Beginnings films	Deadpool films	Video games
John Allerdyce
Pyro	Alexander Burton
Aaron Stanford		Steve Van Wormer
Elizabeth Braddock
Psylocke	Meiling Melançon		Olivia Munn[92][93]	
Caliban		Stephen Merchant	Tómas Lemarquis	
Victor Creed
Sabretooth	Tyler Mane	Liev Schreiber
Michael-James OlsenY		Tyler Mane
Liev Schreiber
Fred Tatasciore
Raven Darkhölme
Mystique	Rebecca Romijn[94]		Jennifer Lawrence[95][79]
Morgan LilyY
Rebecca RomijnO		Anna Graves
Lady Deathstrike	Kelly Hu		Vyvan Pham
Gwendoline Yeo
Bobby Drake
Iceman	Shawn Ashmore		Shawn Ashmore[96]		Shawn Ashmore
Fred J. Dukes
The Blob		Kevin Durand	"Giant" Gustav Claude Ouimet		Gregg Berger
Jean Grey
Phoenix / Dark Phoenix	Famke Janssen
Haley RammY	Famke Janssen[97]	Famke JanssenO [98]
Sophie Turner[99][79]
Summer FontanaY		Katherine Morgan
James "Logan" Howlett
Wolverine	Hugh Jackman	Hugh Jackman
Troye SivanY	Hugh Jackman[100][101][102]	Hugh Jackman
Mark Hamill
Jubilation Lee
Jubilee	Katrina Florence
Kea Wong		Lana Condor[103]	
Erik Lehnsherr
Magneto	Ian McKellen
Brett MorrisY	Ian McKellenC	Michael Fassbender[95][79]
Ian McKellenO
Bill MilnerY
Brett MorrisAY		Dwight Schultz
Fred Tatasciore
Moira MacTaggert	Olivia Williams		Rose Byrne[104]	
James Madrox
Multiple Man	Eric Dane		Eric Dane
Cain Marko
The Juggernaut	Vinnie Jones		Ryan ReynoldsV	Fred Tatasciore
Marie
Rogue	Anna Paquin[105]		Anna Paquin		Jennifer Hale
Peter Maximoff
Quicksilver		Unaccredited ActorC	Evan Peters[79][106]	
Hank McCoy
Beast	Steve Bacic
Kelsey Grammer[107]		Nicholas Hoult
Kelsey GrammerO	Nicholas HoultC	Richard Portnow
Gregg Berger
Ororo Munroe
Storm	Halle Berry[94]	Halle BerryP
April Elleston EnahoroEC	Halle BerryO
Alexandra Shipp[99]	Alexandra ShippC[106]	Debra Wilsonfjean
En Sabah Nur		Oscar Isaac
Berdj GarabedianO
Brendan PedderY		Christopher Corey Smith
Kitty Pryde	Sumela Kay
Katie Stuart
Ellen Page		Ellen Page[96]	
Peter Rasputin
Colossus	Donald Mackinnon
Daniel Cudmore		Daniel Cudmore[108]	Stefan KapičićV[109][110]	Ted Nordblum
Brad Abrell
Kayla Silverfox		Lynn Collins		April Stewart
Jason Stryker	Michael Reid McKay	Unaccredited ActorC		Steve Blum
Grey DeLisleY
William Stryker II	Brian Cox	Danny Huston	Josh Helman[111]		Dave Florek
Alex Summers
Havok		Lucas Till[112][113]	
Scott Summers
Cyclops	James Marsden[114]	Tim Pocock	James MarsdenO
Tye Sheridan[99]	Tye SheridanC[79]	James Arnold Taylor
Bolivar Trask	Bill Duke		Peter Dinklage		Bumper Robinson
Kurt Wagner
Nightcrawler	Alan Cumming		Kodi Smit-McPhee[79][106]	Alan Cumming
Wade Wilson
Deadpool		Ryan Reynolds[115][110]
Scott Adkins[116]		Ryan Reynolds	Steve Blum
Warren Worthington III
Angel / Archangel	Ben Foster
Cayden BoydY		Ben Hardy	
Charles Xavier
Professor X	Patrick Stewart[100]	James McAvoy[95]
Patrick StewartO
Laurence BelcherY	James McAvoy[106]	Patrick Stewart
Ichirō Yashida
Silver Samurai		Haruhiko Yamanouchi
Ken YamamuraY		Keone Young
Yukio		Rila Fukushima		Shiori Kutsuna	
Music
Title	U.S. release date	Length	Composer(s)	Label
X-Men: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[117]	July 11, 2000	40:38	Michael Kamen	Decca
X2: Original Motion Picture Score[118]	April 29, 2003	60:09	John Ottman	Trauma
X-Men: The Last Stand: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[119]	May 23, 2006	61:27	John Powell	Varèse Sarabande
X-Men Origins: Wolverine: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[120]	April 28, 2009	45:32	Harry Gregson-Williams	Varèse Sarabande
X-Men: First Class: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[121]	July 12, 2011	60:14	Henry Jackman	Sony Masterworks
The Wolverine: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[122]	July 23, 2013	58:30	Marco Beltrami	Sony Classical
X-Men: Days of Future Past: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[123]	May 26, 2014	76:28	John Ottman	Sony Classical
Deadpool: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[124]	February 12, 2016	68:12	Tom Holkenborg	Milan
Deadpool Reloaded (More Music from the Motion Picture)	February 12, 2016	39:00	Tom Holkenborg	Milan
X-Men: Apocalypse: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[125]	May 20, 2016	76:00	John Ottman	Sony Music
Logan: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[126]	March 3, 2017	57:31	Marco Beltrami	Lakeshore
Deadpool 2: Original Motion Picture Score[127]	May 11, 2018	37:00	Tyler Bates	Sony Music
Dark Phoenix: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack[128]	June 7, 2019	67:55	Hans Zimmer	Fox Music
Xperiments from Dark Phoenix	August 2, 2019	78:43	Hans Zimmer	Fox Music
Reception
For more details on the reception of each film, see the "Reception" section on each film's article.
Box office performance
Box office performance of X-Men films
Film	U.S. release date	Box office gross	All-time ranking	Production budget
U.S. and Canada	Other territories	Worldwide	U.S. & Canada	Worldwide
X-Men[5]	July 14, 2000	$157,299,717	$139,039,810	$296,339,527	330	479	$75 million
X2[129]	May 2, 2003	$214,949,694	$192,761,855	$407,711,549	178	282	$110 million
X-Men: The Last Stand[13]	May 26, 2006	$234,362,462	$224,997,093	$459,359,555	140	236	$210 million
X-Men Origins: Wolverine[18]	May 1, 2009	$179,883,157	$193,179,707	$373,062,864	252	320	$150 million
X-Men: First Class[24]	June 3, 2011	$146,408,305	$207,215,819	$353,624,124	373	360	$160 million
The Wolverine[32]	July 26, 2013	$132,556,852	$282,271,394	$414,828,246	449	271	$120 million
X-Men: Days of Future Past[41]	May 23, 2014	$233,921,534	$513,941,241	$747,862,775	143	98	$200 million
Deadpool[54]	February 12, 2016	$363,070,709	$420,042,270	$783,112,979	46	89	$58 million
X-Men: Apocalypse[62]	May 27, 2016	$155,442,489	$388,492,298	$543,934,787	336	178	$178 million
Logan[71]	March 3, 2017	$226,277,068	$392,744,368	$619,021,436	154	144	$97 million
Deadpool 2[77]	May 18, 2018	$324,591,735	$460,455,185	$785,046,920	64	87	$110 million
Dark Phoenix[85][130]	June 7, 2019	$65,841,908	$186,597,000	$252,438,908	1,246	584	$200 million
Total[131]	$2,434,559,550	$3,601,738,040	$6,036,297,590		$1.668 billion
The first three X-Men films and Deadpool set opening records in North America: X-Men had the highest July opening yet,[132] while X2 and X-Men: The Last Stand earned the fourth-highest opening weekends yet and Deadpool got the largest opening weekend in February.[133][134][135] The records for the first three films have since been surpassed. The next three X-Men films after X-Men: The Last Stand opened lower than their predecessor and didn't set opening records.[136] In North America, Deadpool is the highest-grossing film in the series, and it also has the highest opening weekend.[131][135] Outside North America, X-Men: Days of Future Past has the highest opening weekend and is the highest-grossing film in the series.[131] Worldwide, Deadpool was the highest-grossing film in the series and the highest-grossing R-rated film of all time, before being surpassed on both records by its sequel.[137]

The X-Men film series is the second highest-grossing film series based on Marvel Comics characters after the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU).[138] In North America, it is the fifth-highest-grossing film series, having earned over $2.4 billion.[139] Worldwide, it is the seventh-highest-grossing film series of all time, having grossed over $6 billion.[131]

Critical and public response
Reception of the X-Men films
Film	Rotten Tomatoes	Metacritic	CinemaScore
X-Men	81% (172 reviews)[140]	64 (33 reviews)[141]	A−[142]
X2	85% (244 reviews)[143]	68 (37 reviews)[144]	A[142]
X-Men: The Last Stand	57% (238 reviews)[145]	58 (38 reviews)[146]	A−[142]
X-Men Origins: Wolverine	37% (260 reviews)[147]	40 (39 reviews)[148]	B+[142]
X-Men: First Class	86% (292 reviews)[149]	65 (38 reviews)[150]	B+[142]
The Wolverine	71% (255 reviews)[151]	61 (43 reviews)[152]	A−[142]
X-Men: Days of Future Past	90% (321 reviews)[153]	75 (43 reviews)[154]	A[142]
Deadpool	85% (340 reviews)[155]	65 (49 reviews)[156]	A[142]
X-Men: Apocalypse	47% (339 reviews)[157]	52 (48 reviews)[158]	A−[142]
Logan	93% (410 reviews)[159]	77 (51 reviews)[160]	A−[142]
Deadpool 2	84% (406 reviews)[161]	66 (51 reviews)[162]	A[142]
Dark Phoenix	23% (361 reviews)[163]	43 (52 reviews)[164]	B−[142]
Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe praised the first three X-Men films as "more than a cash-guzzling wham-bang Hollywood franchise ... these three movies sport philosophy, ideas, a telethon-load of causes, and a highly elastic us-versus-them allegory." Morris praised X-Men: The Last Stand for "put[ting] the heroes of a mighty summer blockbuster in a rare mortal position. Realism at this time of year? How unorthodox!"[165] Roger Ebert gave the films mostly positive reviews, but criticized them for the amount of mutants, stating "their powers are so various and ill-matched that it's hard to keep them all on the same canvas."[166]

The first two films were highly praised due to their cerebral tone. However, when director Bryan Singer left the series, many criticized his successor, Brett Ratner. Colin Colvert of the Star Tribune felt "Singer's sensitivity to [the discrimination themes] made the first two X-Men films surprisingly resonant and soulful for comic-based summer extravaganzas ... Singer is adept at juggling large casts of three-dimensional characters, Ratner makes shallow, unimaginative bang-ups."[167] James Berardinelli felt, "X-Men: The Last Stand isn't as taut or satisfying as X-Men 2, but it's better constructed and better paced than the original X-Men. The differences in quality between the three are minor, however; despite the change in directors, there seems to be a single vision."[168] David Denby of The New Yorker praised "the liquid beauty and the poetic fantasy of Singer's work", but called Ratner's film "a crude synthesizer of comedy and action tropes."[169] Singer's third film in the series, X-Men: Days of Future Past was also well received. Alonso Duralde of The Wrap felt that "Singer keeps things moving along briskly enough that you can just go along with the ride of Superhero Stuff without getting bogged down".[170] Spider-Man director Sam Raimi said he was a fan of the series, particularly Singer's films.[171] Film historian Kim Newman also tonally compared Batman Begins to Singer's films.[172] Logan was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.[173]

There was criticism of the large cast, and the limited screentime for all of them. Richard George of IGN reacted well to the depictions of Wolverine, Professor X, Magneto, Jean Grey, Storm, William Stryker, Mystique, Beast and Nightcrawler; however, George thought many of the younger X-Men characters, such as Rogue, Iceman, Pyro, Angel and Kitty Pryde were "adjectiveless teenager[s]", and was disappointed by Cyclops' characterization. He observed the filmmakers were "big fans of silent henchmen", due to the small roles of the various villainous mutants; such as Lady Deathstrike and Psylocke.[174] While Jesse Schedeen of IGN, stated that the continuity of the films doesn't make sense with dead characters returning with zero or little explanation, different versions of the same character appearing across multiple films and plot points that are conveniently ignored in later films. He also criticized 20th Century Fox for not mapping out the series from the beginning.[175] In his review of Dark Phoenix, Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal characterized the entire X-Men film series as being a "notoriously erratic franchise."[176]

Legacy
Richard George of IGN stated that the success of the first X-Men film paved the way for comic-book film adaptations such as the Spider-Man series, Fantastic Four (2005), V for Vendetta and Singer's Superman Returns.[174] Chris Hewitt of Empire magazine called the first X-Men film as the "catalyst" for films based on Marvel Comics characters, stating "Singer's 2000 film is the catalyst for everything that's come since, good and bad. Without it, there's no Marvel Studios."[177] Comic-book writer Mark Millar said that Singer's X-Men "revolutionized" superhero films.[178] Rebecca Rubin of Variety magazine stated that the X-Men franchise has proven there is an audience for a hardline superhero film, while Jeff Bock of Exhibitor Relations said that with films like the Deadpool films and Logan, the studios can do more with an R-rated film and give the audience something new.[179] However, Tim Grierson and Will Leitch of New York magazine's Vulture criticized the series, noting that the best films of the series failed to capture the zeitgeist the way Marvel Cinematic Universe films did.[180]

Home media
Home media releases of X-Men films
Title	Format	Release date	Films
X-Men Double Pack	VHS	November 10, 2003	X-Men, X2
X-Men Collection	DVD	November 25, 2003	X-Men, X2
X-Men Trilogy	October 3, 2006	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand
The Ultimate Heroes Collection	October 16, 2007	Daredevil, Elektra, Fantastic Four (2005), X-Men
Marvel Heroes	May 13, 2008	Daredevil, Elektra, Fantastic Four (2005), Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer, X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand
X-Men Trilogy	Blu-ray	April 29, 2009	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand
X-Men Quadrilogy	DVD, Blu-ray	October 19, 2009	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand, X-Men Origins: Wolverine
X-Men: The Ultimate Collection	October 31, 2011	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand, X-Men Origins: Wolverine, X-Men: First Class
X-Men and the Wolverine: Adamantium Collection	December 3, 2013	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand, X-Men Origins: Wolverine, X-Men: First Class, The Wolverine
X-Men: The Adamantium Collection
X-Men: Experience Collection	Blu-ray	May 6, 2014	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand, X-Men: First Class
Wolverine Double Feature	October 7, 2014	X-Men Origins: Wolverine, The Wolverine
X-Men: The Cerebro Collection	November 10, 2014	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand, X-Men Origins: Wolverine, X-Men: First Class, The Wolverine, X-Men: Days of Future Past
X-Men Trilogy	April 19, 2016	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand
X-Men: 2-Film Collection	April 19, 2016	X-Men: First Class, X-Men: Days of Future Past
X-Men: Beginnings Trilogy	October 4, 2016	X-Men: First Class, X-Men: Days of Future Past, X-Men: Apocalypse
X-Men Collection	November 1, 2016	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand, X-Men: First Class, X-Men: Days of Future Past, X-Men: Apocalypse
X-Men Universe: 9-Film Bundle	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand, X-Men Origins: Wolverine, X-Men: First Class, The Wolverine, X-Men: Days of Future Past, Deadpool, X-Men: Apocalypse
Wolverine: 2-Movie Collection	January 10, 2017	X-Men Origins: Wolverine, The Wolverine
Deadpool 1 & 2: The Complete Collection (For Now)	August 21, 2018	Deadpool, Deadpool 2
X-Men: 3-Film Collection	September 29, 2018	X-Men, X2, X-Men: The Last Stand
As of May 2014, the DVD and Blu-ray sales of the first six films in the United States earned more than $620 million.[181]

Cancelled projects
In March 2019, The Walt Disney Company acquired the film rights for the X-Men after the acquisition deal of 21st Century Fox was completed.[182] The films in development under 20th Century Fox were placed "on hold"[183] and eventually cancelled by Disney. Any future X-Men films will be produced by Marvel Studios, with The New Mutants serving as the final film in 20th Century Fox's X-Men film series.[184][185] Future films based on the X-Men franchise planned by Fox before the acquisition included:

X-Men / Fantastic Four / Daredevil crossover film: In 2010, Zack Stentz and Ashley Edward Miller were to co-write a film featuring the X-Men, the Fantastic Four, Daredevil and Deadpool. The plot revolved around a superhero registration act, pitting various characters on opposite sides of the conflict similar to the Civil War story arc. Paul Greengrass had been approached to serve as director, though scheduling conflicts placed the project indefinitely on hold.[186] Warren Ellis worked separately on another draft of the script.[187]
X-Force: In July 2013, Jeff Wadlow was hired to write and direct a film adaptation of the X-Men spin-off comic-book series X-Force.[188] Mark Millar, the creative consultant for 20th Century Fox's Marvel Comics based films at the time, stated that the film would feature five characters as protagonists.[189] After the release of Deadpool, Ryan Reynolds said that Deadpool would appear in the film.[190] By May 2016, Simon Kinberg was in the process of rewriting the script.[191] In February 2017, Joe Carnahan had signed on as director, as well as a co-writer with Reynolds.[192] By September of the same year, Drew Goddard was attached to write and direct. Rhett Reese said the film would be a R-rated take on the X-Men.[193] Kinberg, Reynolds and Donner were later slated to serve as producers for the film.[194] In September 2018, Kinberg said that Goddard would begin work on the script after the release of Bad Times at the El Royale.[195]
Gambit: In October 2014, Josh Zetumer was hired to write the screenplay for a film about the character Gambit, based on the treatment by comic-book writer Chris Claremont. In June 2015, Rupert Wyatt was then hired to direct but left in September due to schedule conflicts.[196] In November, Doug Liman was in final negotiations to direct the film.[197] Liman left the film in August 2016, to direct Justice League Dark.[198] By October, Gore Verbinski had signed on as director, while Zetumer continued to work on the script.[199] In January 2018, Verbinski departed the film due to scheduling issues.[200] Kinberg stated that the film was intended to be the start of multiple installments focusing on Gambit, and that the final script had been completed by May 2018.[201][202][203] By January 2019, Tatum was in early negotiations to direct the film.[204] By March, Kinberg was revealed to be co-screenwriter.[205] The film was set to star Channing Tatum in the lead role with Donner, Kinberg, Tatum and Reid Carolin attached as producers.[206] In May 2019, the film was removed from the release schedule.[207]
The New Mutants sequels: In December 2016, Boone stated that he pitched to 20th Century Fox for a New Mutants spin-off film encompassed three films, that would build upon each other and the X-Men franchise. In October 2017, he said that there would be sequels to the film, with the first featuring Warlock and Karma, joining the team.[208] He added that each film would explore a different style within the horror genre.[209]
Alpha Flight and Exiles: In February 2017, Kinberg stated that Alpha Flight and the Exiles were characters being developed for film adaptation.[210][211]
Laura: In February 2017, James Mangold stated that with the introduction of Laura Kinney in Logan, there was a possibility that the character would appear in future films.[212] Later that month, Kinberg said that a film for the character was in development.[210][211] By October of the same year, the script, tentatively titled Laura, was being co-written by Mangold and Craig Kyle.[213]
Multiple Man: In November 2017, a film centering around Multiple Man was in development with James Franco starring in the lead role. Allan Heinberg was attached as screenwriter, with Kinberg and Franco as producers.[214]
Kitty Pryde: In January 2018, Tim Miller was announced to be directing a film centered around Kitty Pryde.[215] In February 2018, Brian Michael Bendis was hired to write the script.[216]
Deadpool 3: In November 2016, plans began for a third Deadpool film.[90] Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick stated the film would enter production after the untitled X-Force film,[217] with Ryan Reynolds and Morena Baccarin reprising their roles. Production was planned to take place in Atlanta, Georgia.[218] After the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney was announced in December 2017 and completed in March 2019, Disney CEO Bob Iger said that Deadpool would be integrated with the MCU under Disney, with Reynolds expected to reprise his role.[219][220] The Once Upon a Deadpool version of Deadpool 2 (2018) was being watched carefully by Disney and Marvel Studios to see whether it might inform how they could approach the character and integrate him into the PG-13 MCU.[221] In October 2019, Reese and Wernick said that they were waiting for approval from Marvel Studios to begin production on the third film. Reese said, "[Deadpool] will live in the R-rated universe that we've created, and hopefully we'll be allowed to play a little bit in the MCU sandbox as well and incorporate him into that."[222] In December 2019, Reynolds confirmed that a third Deadpool film is in development, though it will be produced by Marvel Studios and it's unknown if it would be a continuation of the first two or if it would be rebooted into the MCU.[223]
References
 Jensen, Jeff (July 21, 2000). "X-Men — Marvel's mutants leap onto the big screen". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved August 8, 2007.
 Molloy, Tim (March 25, 2012). "Chris Claremont's Dream X-Men Movie: James Cameron, Kathryn Bigelow, and Bob Hoskins as Wolverine". TheWrap.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2016. Retrieved October 11, 2014.
 Seymour, Craig (May 10, 2000). "Buffy creator slams The X-Men movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2007.
 Schmitz, Greg Dean. "Greg's Preview – X-Men". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 11, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007.
 "X-Men (2000)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Schmitz, Greg Dean. "Greg's Preview – X2: X-Men United". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on February 19, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007.
 Sanderson, Peter (2003). X-Men: The Ultimate Guide. Dorling Kindersley. p. 176. ISBN 0-7513-4617-9.
 Grove, Martin A. (April 11, 2003). "Fox's 'X2' marks spot as presummer starts May 2". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved April 15, 2007.
 Kingberg in Elliott, Sean (June 8, 2006). "Exclusive Interview: Screenwriter Simon Kinberg talks X-men: The Last Stand – Part 1". iF Magazine. Archived from the original on March 10, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007. ... in February of last year Matthew Vaughn was hired to be the director of the film. We worked incredibly close with Matthew, and wrote a very fast sort of structural draft so they could budget and start prepping the movie. ... We worked with him for three or four months, and then Matthew ended up leaving the movie for personal reasons in June or July. [ ... ] In many ways the Phoenix story is the emotional "A" plot of the film, but the political "A" plot of the film became about the cure. That was actually a studio executive's idea. One of them had read Joss Whedon's ["Gifted"] run with the mutant cure in it and thought that would be an interesting quandary for the characters. ...
 Prokopy, Steve (August 7, 2007). "Capone talks to Matthew Vaughn about 'Pussylips', Bobby De Niro, 'X-Men', 'Thor' and much more!!!". Ain't It Cool News. Archived from the original on August 20, 2007. Retrieved August 7, 2007.
 Fleming, Michael; Brodesser, Claude (June 5, 2005). "New master for mutants". Variety. Retrieved February 4, 2020.
 Schmitz, Greg Dean. "Greg's Preview – X-Men: The Last Stand". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 10, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 "X-Men: The Last Stand (2006)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 10, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Fleming, Michael (October 4, 2004). "'X' marks spinoff spot". Variety. Archived from the original on January 4, 2006. Retrieved September 1, 2006.
 "Interview- Hugh Jackman". CanMag. October 15, 2006. Archived from the original on October 30, 2006. Retrieved October 15, 2006.
 "Ratner to Direct Wolverine Film?". IMDb. March 20, 2006. Archived from the original on May 5, 2009. Retrieved September 1, 2006.
 Tsai, Michael (November 8, 2006). "Sequel to Superman Returns due in 2009". The Honolulu Advertiser. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved October 18, 2007.
 "X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 10, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Lussier, Germain (May 25, 2011). "Film Interview: 'X-Men: First Class' Director Matthew Vaughn". Archived from the original on June 21, 2011. Retrieved June 13, 2011.
 Douglas, Edward (April 11, 2006). "Zak Penn on His Potential X-Men Spin-off". SuperheroHype.com. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2010.
 Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men First Class [Second Genesis]. X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 Fleming, Mike (March 26, 2010). "Bryan Singer Producing 'X-Men: First Class'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 14, 2013. Retrieved July 9, 2010.
 Fernandez, Jay A.; Kit, Borys (April 27, 2011). "Complex 'X-Men: First Class' Screenplay Credit Dispute Resolved (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012. Retrieved May 6, 2012.
 "X-Men: First Class (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 20, 2012. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Hewitt, Chris (October 25, 2012). "James Mangold Talks The Wolverine". Empire. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2018.
 Ryan, Tim (July 25, 2013). "Critics Consensus: The Wolverine Is Pretty Sharp". Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved July 26, 2013.
 Kit, Borys (August 13, 2009). "McQuarrie to pen 'Wolverine' sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 10, 2010. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 McClintock, Pamela (March 17, 2011). "Darren Aronofsky Bows Out of 'Wolverine'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved March 17, 2011.
 Fleming, Mike (June 16, 2011). "Fox Chooses James Mangold On 'Wolverine'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 17, 2011. Retrieved June 16, 2011.
 Sneider, Jeff (September 1, 2011). "'Total Recall' scribe rewriting 'Wolverine'". Variety. Retrieved September 2, 2011.[dead link]
 George, Sandy; Diaz, Amanda (April 20, 2012). "The Wolverine to shoot in Sydney". IF Magazine. Archived from the original on May 2, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
 "The Wolverine (2013)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Perry, Spencer (January 28, 2013). "Bryan Singer Talks X-Men: Days of Future Past". Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2013.
 Ryan, Tim (May 22, 2014). "Critic Consensus: X-Men: Days of Future Past is Certified Fresh". Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2014.
 Trumbore, Dave (October 25, 2012). "Matthew Vaughn Out as Director of 'X-Men: First Class' Sequel, 'X-Men: Days Of Future Past'; Bryan Singer May Replace Him". Collider.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 Vary, Adam B. (October 30, 2012). "Bryan Singer will direct 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 31, 2012. Retrieved October 31, 2012.
 Wilding, Josh (November 3, 2011). "Exclusive: Simon Kinberg Writing X-Men: First Class Sequel". Superherohype.com. Archived from the original on August 25, 2012. Retrieved November 3, 2011.
 Wigler, Josh (November 9, 2012). "'X-Men: Days Of Future Past' Shoots In April 2013". Archived from the original on March 4, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST HEADS BACK TO MONTREAL FOR RESHOOTS".
 "Beast Gets To Work In New X-Men: Days Of Future Past Set Photo". Retrieved June 30, 2017.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Arrant, Chris (March 27, 2015). "DEADPOOL Movie Logo & Synopsis Revealed". Newsarama. Archived from the original on March 30, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015.
 Fleming, Michael (May 16, 2000). "Artisan deal a real Marvel". Variety. Archived from the original on August 16, 2014. Retrieved October 18, 2014.
 Marshall, Rick (December 11, 2008). "Deadpool And Gambit: The Long Road To 'X-Men Origins: Wolverine' ... And Beyond?". MTV News. Archived from the original on July 22, 2010. Retrieved October 23, 2010.
 Otto, Jeff (February 2, 2004). "Goyer Confirms Deadpool". IGN. Archived from the original on September 1, 2007. Retrieved July 12, 2009.
 Stax (August 9, 2004). "Goyer Nixes Deadpool". IGN. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011. Retrieved July 12, 2009.
 Stax (March 21, 2005). "The Latest on The Flash & Deadpool". IGN.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2009. Retrieved July 12, 2009.
 Siegel, Tatiana (January 5, 2010). "Fox taps Deadpool writers". Variety. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved October 23, 2010.
 Warner, Kara (July 22, 2010). "Comic-Con: Robert Rodriguez Has Read 'Deadpool' Script, Doesn't Know If He'll Direct". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 24, 2010. Retrieved October 23, 2010.
 Zeitchik, Steven (October 26, 2010). "A new entrant into the 'Deadpool'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 30, 2010. Retrieved October 28, 2010.
 McClintock, Pamela (April 8, 2011). "Fox Sets Tim Miller to Direct 'Deadpool'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved May 9, 2011.
 Perry, Spencer (December 4, 2014). "Deadpool Set to Begin Production in March as Ryan Reynolds Signs on to Return". superherohype.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014.
 Perry, Spencer (May 29, 2015). "Production Wraps on 20th Century Fox's Deadpool". superherohype.com. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved May 30, 2015.
 "Deadpool (2016)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 9, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Perry, Spencer (October 8, 2015). "X-Men: Apocalypse Synopsis Official Released". superherohype.com. Archived from the original on October 9, 2015. Retrieved October 9, 2015.
 Lesnick, Silas (September 22, 2014). "Bryan Singer Confirmed to Direct X-Men: Apocalypse". superherohype.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2014. Retrieved September 23, 2014.
 Stack, Tim (January 7, 2014). "X-Men: Apocalypse: Bryan Singer teases new film 'will address mutant origins' — EXCLUSIVE". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 "The Q&A with Jeff Goldsmith: X-Men: Days of Future Past Q&A". The Q & A Podcast. June 13, 2014. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2014.
 "Simon Kinberg: X-Men: Apocalypse Completes the First Class Trilogy". x-menfilms.com. September 26, 2014. Archived from the original on September 29, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2014.
 Schaefer, Sandy (April 27, 2015). "'X-Men: Apocalypse' Begins Production; First Official Look at Kodi Smit-McPhee as Nightcrawler". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 29, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
 Jayson, Jay (August 22, 2015). "X-Men: Apocalypse Wraps Main Filming". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2015.
 "X-Men: Apocalypse (2016)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 4, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Skipper, Ben (October 18, 2016). "Logan: Hugh Jackman will fight the Reavers in final Wolverine film". Yahoo! Movies UK. Archived from the original on October 21, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2016.
 O'hara, Helen (October 20, 2016). "Logan trailer breakdown: James Mangold talks us through the teaser". Empire. Archived from the original on October 24, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2016.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (November 5, 2013). "James Mangold, Hugh Jackman Sinking Claws into Another 'The Wolverine' Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 6, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013.
 Philbrick, Jami (November 20, 2013). "IAR Exclusive Interview: Director James Mangold Talks 'The Wolverine' Unleashed Extended Edition Blu-Ray, Alternate Ending, and 'The Wolverine 2'". IAmRogue.com. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014.
 Douglas, Edward (March 16, 2014). "The Wolverine Sequel to Film After X-Men: Apocalypse". Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved March 17, 2014.
 Fleming Jr., Mike (March 21, 2014). "Fox Sets David James Kelly To Script Next 'Wolverine'". Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved March 21, 2014.
 Sneider, Jeff (April 24, 2015). "Hugh Jackman's 'Wolverine' Lands 'Blade Runner 2' Writer Michael Green (Exclusive)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016.
 Madden, Shawn (May 8, 2016). "Production Has Kicked Off On James Mangold's Sequel To 'The Wolverine'". Action News 17. Retrieved October 31, 2016.
 "Logan (2017)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Mcnally, Victoria (September 14, 2015). "A 'Deadpool' Sequel Might Already Be In The Works". MTV. Archived from the original on October 28, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (February 9, 2016). "'Deadpool' Sequel Already in the Works". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 28, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016.
 Kit, Borys (November 18, 2017). "It's Official: 'John Wick' Director David Leitch to Helm 'Deadpool 2'". Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 22, 2017). "Exclusive: Drew Goddard Is Working on the 'Deadpool 2' Script [Updated]". Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Reese, Rhett [@RhettReese] (October 14, 2017). "That's a wrap! Deadpool 2 is in the can!" (Tweet). Retrieved October 15, 2017 – via Twitter.
 "Deadpool 2 (2018)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Stack, Tim (December 7, 2017). "X-Men: Dark Phoenix heats up EW's First Look Issue". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 3, 2018. Retrieved August 24, 2018.
 Kit, Borys (June 29, 2017). "'X-Men: Dark Phoenix': Evan Peters Returning as Quicksilver (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 30, 2017.
 "What's Shooting". ACTRA Montreal. June 28, 2017. Archived from the original on June 4, 2017. Retrieved June 30, 2017.
 Hood, Cooper (October 14, 2017). "X-Men: Dark Phoenix Director Announces Filming Has Wrapped". Screen Rant. Retrieved October 15, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (March 28, 2018). "'X-Men: Dark Phoenix' to Get Major Reshoots as Simon Kinberg Tweaks Script". Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Scott, Ryan (August 10, 2018). "Dark Phoenix Reshoots Will Only Last a Few Weeks, Not Months". Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 El-Mahmoud, Sarah (September 1, 2018). "Jessica Chastain Teases X-Men: Dark Phoenix Reshoots With New Video". Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Dark Phoenix (2019)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 15, 2019.
 Vilkomerson, Sara (May 25, 2017). "The New Mutants details revealed: X-Men franchise goes horror". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2018.
 Fleming Jr., Mike (May 13, 2015). "The Fault In Our Stars Director To Helm X-Men Spinoff". Archived from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved May 14, 2015.
 Wood, Matt (December 9, 2016). "When X-Men's New Mutants Is Finally Filming". Cinemablend.com. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Couch, Aaron (October 12, 2017). "X-Men Spinoff Gambit Set For A February 2019 Release Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 12, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (November 9, 2016). "Fox's X-Men Issues: Jennifer Lawrence Unsigned, 'Deadpool' Defections, 'Gambit' on Hold". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 13, 2020). "Disney Reschedules 'The New Mutants' & 'Ron's Gone Wrong'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020.
 Singer, Bryan (April 13, 2015). "Bryan Singer on Instagram: "Excited to welcome @oliviamunn as Betsy Braddock! #Psylocke #XmenApocalypse #XMEN"". Retrieved September 27, 2017.
 Radish, Christina (September 26, 2017). "Olivia Munn on 'The LEGO Ninjago Movie' & Returning for 'X-Men: Dark Phoenix'". Retrieved September 27, 2017.
 Petrikin, Chris (July 1, 1999). "2 actresses near 'X-Men'". Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Singer, Bryan (November 27, 2012). "I'd like to officially welcome back James McAvoy, Jennifer Lawrence, Michael Fassbender, & Nicholas Hoult to #XMEN for #DaysOfFuturePast". Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2017.[non-primary source needed]
 Keyes, Rob (January 26, 2013). "Iceman, Kitty Pryde & Rogue Return For 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". Screenrant. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013.
 Weintraub, Steve (July 24, 2013). "Famke Janssen Talks The Wolverine, Taken 3 and More". Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 Wigler, Josh (June 23, 2014). "HOW 'X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST' MADE ONE OF ITS TOP-SECRET CAMEOS POSSIBLE". Retrieved April 25, 2017.
 Kroll, Justin (January 22, 2015). "Sophie Turner, Tye Sheridan, Alexandra Shipp join 'X-Men: Apocalypse'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2017.
 Collis, Clark (February 24, 2017). "Patrick Stewart is Retiring from the X-Men franchise". Retrieved April 25, 2017.
 Singer, Bryan [@BryanSinger] (December 18, 2012). "I would officially like to welcome @RealHughJackman to the cast of #Xmen Days of Future Past. Very excited! More to come ..." (Tweet). Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 25, 2017 – via Twitter.[non-primary source needed]
 Waxman, Olivia B. (April 25, 2016). "Hugh Jackman Just Teased an X-Men: Apocalypse Wolverine Cameo". Time. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 Singer, Bryan (March 25, 2015). "Bryan Singer on Instagram: "I'd officially like to welcome our newest mutant #JubilationLee, #Armor @LanaCondor to #XMEN #Apocalypse"". Instagram. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2017.
 Franich, Darren (January 30, 2015). "'X-Men: Apocalypse': Rose Byrne returning as Moira MacTaggert – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved May 11, 2017.
 Fleming, Michael (June 21, 1999). "Paquin suits up for Singer's 'X' team". Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Fullerton, Huw (May 24, 2018). "Deadpool 2's biggest and best cameos". Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 Russell, Jamie (May 18, 2005). "High Noon – 18th May 2005". Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Singer, Bryan [@BryanSinger] (March 15, 2013). "3 #Oscars, 6 #GoldenGlobes, 1 #BAFTA, 2 #Emmys, 2 #Tonys, 5 #Oliviers, 1 #Ceaser – Now let's blow s**t up! #XMEN" (Tweet). Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2013 – via Twitter.[non-primary source needed]
 McGovern, Joe (December 23, 2015). "Meet Stefan Kapicic, the Serbian actor inside the 7-and-a-half-foot tall mutant Colossus in Deadpool". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2017.
 Caleb, Reading (April 13, 2017). "Deadpool 2: Ryan Reynolds And Colossus Actor React To Cable Casting, Confirm X-Force". Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 Sneider, Jeff (May 26, 2017). "'X-Men: Days of Future Past' Casts Rising Aussie Actor Josh Helman (Exclusive)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (July 15, 2013). ""Mankind must put an end to war before war puts an end to mankind." -JFK @lucastill #xmen #DaysOfFuturePast". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2017.[non-primary source needed]
 Singer, Bryan. "Welcome back #lucastill #xmen #XmenApocalypse #jamesmcavoy #michaelfassbender #jenniferlawrence #nicholashoult #rosebyrne How time flies! #XmenFirstClass". Instagram. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2017.
 "Marsden on Superman Returns & X-Men 3". June 8, 2005. Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Fleming, Jr., Mike (December 4, 2014). "Ryan Reynolds In 'Deadpool' Deal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 4, 2017. Retrieved May 11, 2017.
 "Exclusive: Ryan Reynolds On Deadpool & Mystery Mutant In 'Wolverine' Movie Trailer: 'That's Me'". MTV. March 17, 2009. Retrieved May 8, 2009.
 "Michael Kamen, Michael Kamen – X-Men: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack". Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 23, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2017.
 "X2 (Original Motion Picture Score) by John Ottman on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "X-Men: The Last Stand (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by John Powell on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2017.
 "X-Men Origins: Wolverine (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by Harry Gregson-Williams on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "X-Men: First Class (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by Henry Jackman on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "The Wolverine (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by Marco Beltrami on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2017.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by John Ottman on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "Deadpool (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by Junkie XL on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "X-Men: Apocalypse (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by John Ottman on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2017.
 "Logan (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by Marco Beltrami on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "Deadpool 2 (Original Motion Picture Score) by Tyler Bates on Apple Music". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 20, 2018.
 "Fox Music to Release 'Dark Phoenix' Soundtrack". iTunes Store. June 1, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2019.
 "X2: X-Men United (2003)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 21, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Rubin, Rebecca (June 5, 2019). "Dark Phoenix Takes on Secret Life of Pets 2 in Summer Box Office Battle". Variety. Retrieved June 5, 2019.
 "X-Men Movies at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2019.
 Gray, Brandon (July 17, 2000). "Weekend Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 1, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 Gray, Brandon (May 5, 2003). "'X2' Evolves Past Predecessor in Stellar Summer Kick-Off". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 1, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 Gray, Brandon (May 30, 2006). "'X-Men' Marvels with Memorial Record". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 Brevet, Brad (February 11, 2006). "Record Breaker: A Look at the Box Office Records 'Deadpool' Has Already Broken". Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2016.
 Subers, Ray (July 28, 2013). "Weekend Report: Wolverine Bleeds But Still Easily Leads". Archived from the original on January 12, 2014. Retrieved December 28, 2013.
 Coggan, Devan (March 29, 2016). "'Deadpool': Highest-grossing R-rated movie ever". Retrieved May 23, 2017.
 "Marvel Comics Moviesat the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016.
 "Movie Franchises and Brands Index". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. Retrieved July 4, 2019.
 "X-Men". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 "X-Men (2000): Reviews". Metacritic. [CBS]. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013.
 "CinemaScore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on February 6, 2018. Retrieved November 16, 2018.
 "X2: X-Men United". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 "X2: X-Men United (2004): Reviews". Metacritic. CBS. Archived from the original on June 27, 2012. Retrieved July 27, 2013.
 "X-Men: The Last Stand". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on June 24, 2015. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 "X-Men: The Last Stand (2006): Reviews". Metacritic. CBS. Archived from the original on October 13, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013.
 "X-Men Origins: Wolverine". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009): Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 28, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013.
 "X-Men: First Class". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "X-Men: First Class". Metacritic. CBS. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013.
 "The Wolverine". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on April 30, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 "The Wolverine". Metacritic. CBS. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved August 9, 2013.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past". Metacritic. CBS. Archived from the original on May 27, 2017. Retrieved May 30, 2014.
 "Deadpool". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "Deadpool". Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2016.
 "X-Men: Apocalypse". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "X-Men: Apocalypse". Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 28, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
 "Logan". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "Logan". Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "Deadpool 2 (2018)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "Deadpool 2 reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "Dark Phoenix". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "Dark Phoenix". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved June 11, 2019.
 Morris, Wesley (May 5, 2006). "X-Men: The Last Stand Movie Review". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on September 6, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 Ebert, Roger (May 26, 2006). "X-Men: The Last Stand (PG-13)". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on March 10, 2013. Retrieved August 2, 2007.
 Colvert, Colin (May 25, 2006). "Movie review: 'X-Men' trilogy goes down in flames". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on August 14, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2007.
 Berardinelli, James (2006). "X-Men: The Last Stand". Reelviews. Retrieved August 2, 2007.
 Denby, David (June 5, 2006). "Violent Times". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 Duralde, Alonso (May 12, 2014). "X-Men: Days of Future Past Review: Mutant Saga Crosses the Stream of Its Old-School and Newer Characters". Archived from the original on May 24, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2014.
 Cronin, Brian (November 28, 2007). "Guest Spot: Rohan Williams Interviews Sam Raimi and Rob Tapert (Part 1)". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 6, 2007. Retrieved November 28, 2007.
 Newman, kim. "Batman Begins (12A)". Empire. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 Riesman, Abraham (January 23, 2018). "Logan's Oscar Nomination Is a Significant Breakthrough". Retrieved August 23, 2018.
 George, Richard (December 15, 2006). "X-Men in Film". IGN.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
 Schedeen, Jesse (March 23, 2017). "17 Reasons X-Men Movie Continuity Makes No Sense". Retrieved August 24, 2018.
 Morgenstern, Joe (June 7, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Review: A Marvelous Wrap". The Wall Street Journal. 273 (132): A11. Retrieved June 7, 2019.
 Hewitt, Chris. "Bryan Singer on the Complete Story of the X-Men". Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 9, 2014.
 Outlaw, Kofi. "Mark Millar Talks Shepherding Fox's Marvel Movie Universe & Upcoming Movies". Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved August 9, 2014.
 Rubin, Rebecca (May 21, 2018). "Will 'Deadpool 2' Make Disney Open to Releasing R-Rated Movies Again?". Retrieved August 24, 2018.
 "All 12 X-Men Movies, Ranked". June 6, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019.
 Hughes, Mark (May 28, 2014). "Review – Days of Future Past Proves X-Men Still Among the Best". Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved August 11, 2014.
 "Disney Closes $71.3 Billion Fox Deal, Creating Global Content Powerhouse". The Hollywood Reporter. March 19, 2019. Retrieved March 20, 2019.
 Chitwood, Adam (February 5, 2019). "Lauren Shuler Donner Confirms Fox Marvel Movies on Hold; Wants 'X-Men' Franchise to "Evolve"". /Film. Archived from the original on February 5, 2019. Retrieved February 5, 2019.
 Husband, Andrew (April 3, 2019). "It Sounds Like Dark Phoenix is Going to Be Fox's Final X-Men Movie". Retrieved April 5, 2019.
 Long, Christian (April 3, 2019). "Disney confirms X-Men team getting 'perfect sendoff,' New Mutants still on release slate". Syfy. Retrieved April 6, 2019.
 Kevin Smith (May 30, 2019). "Zack Stentz, Writer of Rim of the World, Thor, X-Men First Class" – via YouTube.
 Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys; McMillan, Graeme (June 1, 2019). "X-Men's Secret War". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 1, 2019.
 Kit, Borys (July 13, 2013). "'Kick-Ass 2' Filmmaker Tackling Fox's 'X-Force' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Josh, Wigler (July 24, 2013). "Fox's 'X-Force' Movie Will Feature Five-Person Team, Millar Teases". Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Osborn, Alex (February 9, 2016). "Getting an X-Force Movie Made Is Ryan Reynolds' Next Priority". IGN.com. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Angie, Han (May 17, 2016). "X-Force Movie: Simon Kinberg Writing; Will We See X-23?". Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Drew, Carlton (February 23, 2017). "X-Force Film Gets A Director & Reynolds To Co-Write". Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Jacob Oller (May 18, 2018). "X-Force Will Be R-Rated, 'Raunchier' Take On X-Men Says Deadpool 2 Writer". Retrieved May 20, 2018.
 Fleming Jr., Mike (September 7, 2017). "Drew Goddard To Direct, Write 'X-Force' With Deadpool Leading Black Ops Force At Fox". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Barnett, Brian (September 27, 2018). "Gambit Will Be A Romantic Comedy, Says Producer". IGN. Retrieved September 27, 2018.
 Hayes, Britt (September 16, 2015). "'Gambit' Solo Movie Loses Director Rupert Wyatt". Screen Crush. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015. Retrieved September 16, 2015.
 Kit, Borys (November 12, 2015). "Doug Liman Near Deal to Direct Channing Tatum's 'Gambit'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 13, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Kroll, Justin (August 24, 2016). "Doug Liman to Direct 'Dark Universe' for DC, Warner Bros. (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on December 2, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 12, 2017). "Gambit Starring Channing Tatum Will Release Valentines Day 2019". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 12, 2017.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (January 11, 2018). "Gore Verbinski Pulls Off Of Gambit". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 11, 2018.
 Britt, Hayes (February 24, 2017). "'X-Men' Producer Says 'Gambit' Will Begin Filming Next Year". Archived from the original on May 7, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Carras, Christi (May 14, 2018). "Producer Simon Kinberg Hopes to Start Filming Channing Tatum's Gambit This Summer". Variety. Retrieved May 30, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 28, 2018). "'Alita' Flies Out Of Christmas, 'Dark Phoenix' To Rise Summer, 'Deadpool 2' Re-release Hits Sked, 'Gambit' Now 2020 – Fox Date Changes". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved September 28, 2018.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (January 18, 2019). "Channing Tatum Exits UTA And Management 360". Retrieved April 8, 2019.
 Nissen, Daniel (March 27, 2019). "Gambit Update: Simon Kinberg Says Fox Films Are Being 'Evaluated' Since Disney Merger". Retrieved April 8, 2019.
 Fleming Jr., Mike. "Channing Tatum's 'X-Men' Character 'Gambit' Spinoff Moving Forward". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 2, 2014.
 Goldberg, Matt (May 7, 2019). "'Gambit' Is Dead; Disney Drops the X-Men Spinoff from the Schedule". Collider. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019.
 Hood, Cooper (October 13, 2017). "Warlock and Karma Will Be In New Mutants 2". Screen Rant. Retrieved October 15, 2017.
 Joseph, Matt (October 13, 2017). "Josh Boone says New Mutants Will Kick Off A Trilogy Of Horror Films". We Got This Covered. Retrieved October 15, 2017.
 Perris, Sebastian (February 24, 2017). "'Logan' Producer Simon Kinberg Eyeing 'Exiles' & 'Alpha Flight' For Future 'X-Men' Projects". Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017.
 "Simon Kinberg teases Alpha Flight and Exiles for future X-Men movies". March 3, 2017. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017.
 "James Mangold Wants To Make An X-23 Film, Will Work With Hugh Jackman Again". Wegotthiscovered.com. February 12, 2017.
 Couch, Aaron (October 24, 2017). "'Logan' Team on Dreaming Up a 'Laura' Spinoff and Finding the Drama in Wolverine's Goodbye". Retrieved January 4, 2018.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (November 16, 2017). "James Franco, Simon Kinberg and Allan Heinberg Team Up For Marvel's Multiple Man Film". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 16, 2017.
 Trumbore, Dave (January 9, 2018). "Tim Miller Developing Solo 'Kitty Pryde' Movie at Fox". Collider. Retrieved January 9, 2018.
 Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (February 12, 2018). "X-Men Spinoff: Kitty Pryde Movie In The Works With Tim Miller And Brian Michael Bendis". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 17, 2018.
 Matt Morrison (May 17, 2018). "X-Force Gives A Much-Needed Break For Writers To Figure Out Deadpool 3". Retrieved May 20, 2018.
 Prasad, R.A (August 2, 2018). "Deadpool 3 Is In Active Development, Filming Location Reportedly Revealed". PursueNews. Retrieved August 6, 2018.
 White, Peter; Hayes, Dade (December 14, 2017). "Disney-Fox Deal: Bob Iger Discusses Digital Future, James Murdoch, Hulu and $2B Cost Savings". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 16, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2017.
 Couch, Aaron (December 14, 2017). "'Deadpool' Can Stay R-Rated at Disney, Says Bob Iger". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 16, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2017.
 Boucher, Geoff (November 5, 2018). "'Once Upon A Deadpool': Ryan Reynolds (and Fred Savage) On Franchise's PG-13 Plunge". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved November 6, 2018.
 Kaye, Don (October 13, 2019). "Deadpool 3 Waiting on Marvel Studios Green Light". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on October 13, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019.
 Ridgely, Charlie (December 27, 2019). "Ryan Reynolds Confirms Deadpool 3 at Marvel Studios". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved December 27, 2019.
External links
	Film portal
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
X-Men film series at AllMovie
vte
X-Men in other media
vte
Live-action theatrical films based on Marvel Comics
Categories: English-language filmsX-Men (film series)Action film seriesAmerican film series20th Century Fox franchisesMarvel Entertainment franchisesScience fiction film seriesFilm series introduced in 2000Film series based on Marvel Comics
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Português
中文
Français
Русский
العربية
فارسی
हिन्दी
Español
Bahasa Indonesia
28 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 14 July 2020, at 21:20 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Click here for more information.
X-Men: Days of Future Past
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the 2014 film. For the comics storyline, see Days of Future Past. For other uses, see Days of Future Past (disambiguation).
X-Men: Days of Future Past
Official poster
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Bryan Singer
Produced by	
Bryan Singer
Lauren Shuler Donner
Simon Kinberg
Hutch Parker
Screenplay by	Simon Kinberg
Story by	
Jane Goldman
Simon Kinberg
Matthew Vaughn
Based on	
X-Men
by
Stan Lee
Jack Kirby

Days of Future Past
by
Chris Claremont
John Byrne
Starring	
Hugh Jackman
James McAvoy
Michael Fassbender
Jennifer Lawrence
Halle Berry
Anna Paquin
Ellen Page
Peter Dinklage
Ian McKellen
Patrick Stewart
Music by	John Ottman
Cinematography	Newton Thomas Sigel
Edited by	John Ottman
Production
companies
Marvel Entertainment
TSG Entertainment
Bad Hat Harry Productions
The Donners' Company
Distributed by	20th Century Fox
Release date
May 10, 2014 (Javits Center)
May 23, 2014 (United States)
Running time
131 minutes[1]
Country	
United Kingdom[2]
United States[2]
Language	English
Budget	$200–220 million[3][4][5]
Box office	$747.9 million[3]
X-Men: Days of Future Past is a 2014 superhero film directed and produced by Bryan Singer and written by Simon Kinberg from a story by Kinberg, Jane Goldman, and Matthew Vaughn. A British-American venture, the film is based on the fictional X-Men characters that appear in Marvel Comics, the seventh installment of the X-Men film series and a sequel to X-Men: The Last Stand (2006), X-Men: First Class (2011) and The Wolverine (2013). It stars an ensemble cast, including Hugh Jackman, James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Jennifer Lawrence, Halle Berry, Anna Paquin, Ellen Page, Peter Dinklage, Ian McKellen, and Patrick Stewart. The story, inspired by the 1981 Uncanny X-Men storyline "Days of Future Past" by Chris Claremont and John Byrne, focuses on two time periods, with Logan traveling back in time to 1973 to change history and prevent an event that results in doom for both humans and mutants.

Vaughn had directed X-Men: First Class and was set to return in Days of Future Past before leaving for Kingsman: The Secret Service and the 2015 version of Fantastic Four. Thus Singer, who had directed the first two X-Men films, made his return as a director, and brought along most of the crew from those productions. With a budget of $205 million principal photography began in Montreal, Quebec in April 2013 and concluded in August the same year, with additional filming and pick-ups taking place in November 2013 and February 2014. Twelve companies handled the visual effects.

X-Men: Days of Future Past premiered in New York City on May 10, 2014, and was theatrically released on May 23 by 20th Century Fox. It is the second-best-reviewed film in the X-Men film series following Logan, drawing favorable notices for its story, visual effects, action scenes, score, acting, thematic elements, and Singer's direction. During its theatrical run, the film earned over $747 million worldwide, making it the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2014, as well as the third-highest-grossing film in the series behind Deadpool and Deadpool 2. The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects, making it the first X-Men film to be nominated for an Oscar. A sequel, titled X-Men: Apocalypse, was released on May 27, 2016.[6]


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
3.1	Development
3.2	Writing
3.3	Pre-production
3.4	Casting
3.5	Filming
3.6	Visual effects
4	Music
4.1	Track listing
5	Release
5.1	Marketing
5.2	Promotional partners
5.3	Home media
5.3.1	The Rogue Cut
6	Reception
6.1	Box office
6.2	Critical response
6.3	Accolades
7	See also
8	References
9	External links
Plot
In a dystopian 2023, Sentinels have been programmed to identify and hunt down mutants and any humans who help them. A small band of X-Men survivors led by Kitty Pryde consisting of Colossus, Blink, Warpath, Bishop, Iceman and Sunspot are attacked by the Sentinels but Pryde sends Bishop's consciousness back in time a few days to warn the others as to ensure their survival.

The group retreats to a remote Chinese temple where they meet up with Professor Charles Xavier, Magneto, Storm, and Logan. Xavier explains the history of the Sentinels, which were designed by Bolivar Trask, a military scientist whom Mystique assassinated in 1973. Alarmed by Trask's death, government forces captured Mystique and experimented on her, using her DNA to advance the Sentinel program, thus allowing them to adapt to nearly every mutant power. Xavier and Magneto plan to use Pryde's ability to prevent Trask's assassination and the subsequent apocalyptic future but since Xavier would not survive going back decades, Logan volunteers instead because his regenerative powers would allow him to survive the process.

After awakening in his younger body in 1973, Wolverine goes to the X-Mansion, discovering the school has been shut down for years due to many students and staff being drafted into the Vietnam War, and Erik Lehnsherr being falsely arrested for killing fellow mutant John F. Kennedy. A young, broken Xavier turned to alcoholism and has shunned his mutant powers by using a specialized serum that allows him to walk but this suppresses his telepathic abilities. Hoping to reunite with Mystique, Xavier helps Logan and breaks Lehnsherr out of prison, aided by Hank McCoy and the newly recruited Peter Maximoff.

Mystique discovers Trask has been experimenting on mutants, and in revenge, plots to assassinate him at the Paris Peace Accords. Her attempt fails after Xavier, McCoy, and Logan intervene. However, Lehnsherr attempts to kill her, believing this could prevent the Sentinel takeover from happening. A fight ensues between McCoy and Lehnsherr, allowing Mystique to escape but publicly exposing the three as mutants. Trask takes advantage of this and successfully convinces President Richard Nixon to initialize the Sentinel program.

Lehnsherr retrieves his helmet from the military custody, using it to block Xavier's psychic powers, and secretly takes control of Trask's Sentinel prototypes. Returning to the X-Mansion, Xavier abandons the serum, regaining his mutant power, and communicates with his future self, who inspires him to protect the relationship between mutants and baseline humans. After using Cerebro to track Mystique, Xavier, McCoy, and Logan travel to Washington, D.C., to stop Mystique's plot to assassinate Trask.

At a ceremony where Nixon unveils the Sentinels, Xavier, McCoy, and Logan search for the disguised Mystique. Magneto appears, controlling the Sentinels, and barricades the White House with the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium. During the battle, Magneto impales Logan with rebar and throws him into the Potomac River. Nixon, Trask, and a disguised Mystique retreat to the White House Bunker, but Magneto rips it out of the building with the intention of killing the president.

In the future, the X-Men make their last stand as a large onslaught of Sentinels launched their attack on them. Many perish while attempting to buy more time with Magneto seriously injured. In 1973, Xavier persuades Mystique to spare Trask after she saves Nixon from Magneto, altering history and erasing the Sentinels from existence. Magneto and Mystique each leave, one a criminal, the other a hero. Trask is jailed for attempting to sell U.S. military secrets to Vietnamese officials.

Wolverine awakens at the mansion in 2023 to find Iceman, Rogue, Colossus, Pryde, Beast, Storm, Jean Grey, Scott Summers and Xavier alive. Xavier tells a curious Wolverine they have much to discuss. Back in 1973, the younger Logan is rescued by Mystique, who is disguised as William Stryker.

In a post-credits scene in Ancient Egypt, a crowd is seen chanting to En Sabah Nur, who telekinetically elevates building blocks to build pyramids as four horsemen observe him from afar.[7][8]

Cast

The cast of X-Men: Days of Future Past promoting the film at the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con International. From top to bottom: Jackman, McAvoy, Fassbender, Lawrence, Berry, Hoult, Paquin, Page, Dinklage, McKellen, Stewart, Ashmore, Sy, and Peters.
Hugh Jackman as Logan / Wolverine
A mutant with accelerated healing, heightened animal-like senses, and—in 1973—retractable bone claws; in the future, his skeleton and claws are laced with adamantium in his body, making him virtually invulnerable. His healing factor also slows his aging, allowing him to live above the lifespan of an ordinary human. Jackman noted how Wolverine driving the plot in spite of his gruff personality made for interesting story choices, as "if you want someone to go back to take someone's head off, fantastic, but he's really got to go back and almost act in parts as inspiration, as mentor, as guide, because he can't do it all on his own, which is always his preferred method".[9]
James McAvoy (younger adult) and Patrick Stewart (adult) as Charles Xavier / Professor X
A mutant pacifist and the world's most powerful telepath. He is also a founder of Xavier's School for Gifted Youngsters, and leader of the X-Men. Singer described the younger Xavier as "a very different beast from First Class's feckless playboy. He's a wounded animal, bearded, long-haired, filled with rage at the way the world has treated him".[10] Kinberg said the film was intended to be the story of the younger Xavier beginning to "become the Professor Xavier we know" as Wolverine mentored him.[11]
Michael Fassbender (younger adult) and Ian McKellen (adult) as Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto
A powerful mutant who can manipulate magnetic fields. While he dissents with Xavier due to a wish to prove mutantkind's superiority, they revert to being allies as adult Erik helps the X-Men battle against Sentinels in the future.
Jennifer Lawrence as Raven Darkhölme / Mystique
A mutant with the shapeshifting ability, and also Xavier's childhood friend and adopted sister. Singer said Mystique "is less innocent, evolved, getting closer to where Mystique was in X-Men 2".[12] Lawrence had suffered skin irritations from the full body make-up used in First Class, and the process was changed so from the neck down it would be a bodysuit,[13] whose zipper was digitally removed in post-production.[14] As a result, the make-up process was reduced from eight hours to three.[15] The make-up team at Legacy Effects sculpted Mystique's scales digitally, making them shorter in size and placed in a way that they would accentuate Lawrence's face.[16]
Halle Berry as Ororo Munroe / Storm
A mutant who can manipulate weather and one of the most battle-tested and powerful X-Men. Asked if her pregnancy affected her role, Berry replied, "I wasn't in as much as I was meant to be. My ever-growing belly was posing a constant challenge! What I could do was getting more limited so the role that I play is so different from what it could have been, due to my surprise pregnancy".[17] According to Kinberg, Berry had another scene in the film that was cut because of Berry's limited schedule.[18]
Nicholas Hoult (younger adult) and Kelsey Grammer (adult; uncredited) as Dr. Hank McCoy / Beast
A mutant with leonine attributes, super-strength, agility, reflexes and enhanced speed. Hoult plays the character in scenes set in 1973 while Grammer makes a cameo appearance as Beast in the future setting.[19] The cameo was added because the writers felt Hoult's Beast was "such a sweet, young character" that audiences would want to learn he survived.[20] Once Grammer learned of this opportunity to return as Beast, a character he had enjoyed playing in The Last Stand, he called Singer asking to get involved, and was flown from New York in secret to avoid drawing attention.[21]
Anna Paquin as Marie / Rogue
A mutant who can absorb the life force and mutant abilities of anyone she touches. Kinberg wrote a shorter part for Paquin than initially planned because she did not have much time to be on-set.[18] During post-production, Paquin's role was reduced to a cameo after most of her scenes were cut; these scenes were later restored on an alternate version of the film, which was released to home media.[22][23][24][25] According to Kinberg, Rogue was to be rescued by the future Magneto and Xavier to provide the elder characters a mission, "something like Unforgiven". Eventually the producers felt it was a subplot that did "not service the main story", and reshot scenes to replace them.[26] However, she was still featured in the film's various promotional materials.[27][28] Paquin later stated that she still had fun making the film and did not mind that the majority of her scenes had been cut from it.[29][30]
Ellen Page as Kitty Pryde
A mutant who can pass through solid objects. As the youngest member of the X-Men, she plays an important role in their fight for survival.[31] Singer described Pryde as the prime facilitator and that Pryde's phasing ability enables time-travel to happen.[32] Kinberg, when asked why Pryde is not the time-traveler in the film adaptation of the comic-book story, said, "[If] we tried to follow the original and use Kitty, we had a problem because Ellen is 25 years old and she'd be -20 in the First Class era".[11]
Peter Dinklage as Bolivar Trask
A military scientist and the head of Trask Industries who creates a range of robots called Sentinels, designed to find and destroy mutants. Dinklage said Trask "sees what he's doing as a good thing—[his ambition is] definitely blind and he's quite arrogant. He has striven all his life for a certain respect and attention". He also said Trask is opposed by Richard Nixon.[33] Singer said he is a fan of Dinklage and of the television series Game of Thrones in which Dinklage stars as Tyrion Lannister, which inspired him to cast Dinklage.[18]
Shawn Ashmore as Bobby Drake / Iceman
A mutant who can create and manipulate ice. Ashmore said about his role, "In the first X-Men I had to make a rose for Rogue but that was the extent of the character, so it's cool to see over these four movies going from that to X2—where you sort of see him do an ice wall—and in X3 he finally gets to battle, and in Days of Future Past we're soldiers".[34]
Omar Sy as Bishop
A mutant who can absorb energy and redirect it in kinetic blasts. Singer said Bishop, along with Warpath, Sunspot and Blink, are not fresh recruits. He said, "they're more refugees that are living day to day in this hideously ruined world. They don't have much hope in the future. They're on the run and they join forces with the remaining X-Men to try to do this one last attempt at fixing the world".[35]
Evan Peters as Peter Maximoff / Quicksilver
A mutant who can move, speak and think at supersonic speeds. Peters described Quicksilver as "very fast, he talks quick, he moves quick. Everything else is very slow compared to him, it's like he's always at the ATM waiting for the bastard in front of him to finish".[36]
Josh Helman as Major William Stryker
A military officer who hates mutants. Helman was originally chosen to play a younger version of Juggernaut before that character was removed from the script.[37] Brian Cox, who portrayed adult Stryker in X2, appears in archive footage.
Daniel Cudmore as Peter Rasputin / Colossus
A mutant who can transform his body into organic steel, which grants him superhuman strength, stamina, and durability while in that form. Cudmore was asked whether he trained for his role, he replied, "I didn't have a ton of time to get film ready for this. A trainer friend of mine from Vancouver put together a quick little workout program for me. Since the role was for Colossus, I was aiming to bulk up a bit and get stronger. I ended up eating a lot more. Because of how much I was eating, I had to eat every 2-3 hours to keep my calories up".[38]
Fan Bingbing as Blink
A mutant who has the ability to create portals to teleport. Fan said the film was the first of a five X-Men movie contract she signed with 20th Century Fox.[39]
Adan Canto as Sunspot
A mutant with an ability to project solar energy, create flames and possesses solar-powered strength and flight.[40] To prepare for the role, Canto researched Sunspot because when he was cast, he did not know the level of involvement his character has in the film.[41]
Booboo Stewart as James Proudstar / Warpath
A bowie knives wielding mutant and expert tracker with super agility, reflexes, acute senses and enhanced strength. In preparation for the role, Stewart gained 50 pounds and grew his hair much longer than its usual length.[42]
Additionally, Famke Janssen and James Marsden reprise their roles as Jean Grey and Scott Summers / Cyclops, respectively, in cameo appearances. Lucas Till reprises his role as Alex Summers / Havok. Evan Jonigkeit portrays Toad. Gregg Lowe portrays Ink. Jaa Smith-Johnson portrays a mutant soldier named Daniels.[43] X-Men comic book writers Len Wein and Chris Claremont appear as United States congressmen. Michael Lerner plays Senator Brickman. Mark Camacho portrays U.S. President Richard Nixon. Zehra Leverman portrays Quicksilver's mother Ms. Maximoff. Singer cameos as a man with a small film camera as Magneto walks away after Mystique's escape in Paris. In a post-credits scene, Brendan Pedder portrays the ancient mutant, En Sabah Nur.[44]

Production
Development
Producer Lauren Shuler Donner stated in August 2006 that a continuation of the X-Men main film series would require a renegotiation. New cast members of X-Men: The Last Stand were signed, while the older cast members were not.[45] Donner said, "There is forty years worth of stories. I've always wanted to do 'Days of Future Past' and there are just really a lot of stories yet to be told".[46] She later pitched the idea of a fourth installment of the X-Men franchise to director Bryan Singer, following the completion of the 2011 prequel X-Men: First Class.[47] In March 2011, Donner said the film was in "active development at Fox"; she said, "We took the treatment to Fox and they love it ... And X4 leads into X5".[48]

20th Century Fox saw X-Men: First Class as the first film of a new X-Men trilogy.[49] Donner compared the franchise plans to the darker, more mature content of the Harry Potter film series.[50] Early reports said Matthew Vaughn and Singer were returning to direct and produce the sequel, respectively.[51] While still attached to the project as a director, Vaughn said, "First Class is similar to Batman Begins, where you have the fun of introducing the characters and getting to know them, but that takes time. But with the second one, you can just get on with it and have a rollicking good time. That's the main difference between Batman Begins and The Dark Knight".[52] Describing the possible beginning of the film, Vaughn said, "I thought it would be fun to open with the Kennedy assassination, and we reveal that the magic bullet was controlled by Magneto".[53] Singer said the film could be set around the civil rights movement or the Vietnam War,[54] and that Wolverine could once again be featured.[55] Singer also talked about "changing history" in an interview with Empire magazine. He said he does not want people to panic about events in the past "erasing" the storylines of the previous X-Men films, as he believes in multiverses, explaining the possibility of certain events can exist equally in the histories of alternate universes.[56]

Writing
Kinberg said the main focus of this film was the future of the X-Men film series. With the use of cast members from the original trilogy and from First Class, they needed to decide the sequels' destination.[18] In preparation for the film, Kinberg studied films about time travel, including Back to the Future, The Terminator, and Terminator 2: Judgment Day. Singer originated a philosophy and a set of rules for the time travel in the film so the story would be as plausible as possible.[18]

According to Kinberg, as they were writing the script, they thought it is sensible that Wolverine was traveling between time periods, because of his ageless look and ability to heal rapidly.[18] He further stated of making Wolverine the time traveler, "We made the decision for a lot of reasons  ...  he's the protagonist of the franchise, and probably the most beloved character to a mass audience".[57] Kinberg and Vaughn considered Bishop and Cable candidates for the role of time traveler.[11] Kinberg said Rachel Summers was in the first draft of the script; she sent Wolverine back to 1972. The character was later replaced with Kitty Pryde, to whom Kinberg gave a secondary power of sending people's consciousnesses into the past.[58] Juggernaut, Jubilee, Nightcrawler and Psylocke were also considered for the film.[59][60][61][62]

Singer was asked how the film integrates the themes of the earlier X-Men films; he said, "It establishes that some villain characters may have been right with their fears. It confronts the notions of hope and second chances. Its characters that are lost trying to find themselves. In X-Men 1 and 2, the characters had come into their own and knew who they were. In this one, they're all lost and they're trying to keep it together".[63]

Pre-production
In November 2011, Simon Kinberg—co-writer of X-Men: The Last Stand and co-producer of X-Men: First Class—was hired to write the film's screenplay.[64] In May 2012, 20th Century Fox announced the film would be released on July 18, 2014.[65] The release was later moved forward to May 23, 2014.[66] In August 2012, the title for the film was confirmed to be X-Men: Days of Future Past. The film is inspired by Chris Claremont and John Byrne's X-Men comic book storyline, "Days of Future Past", which introduced the idea of an alternate future for mutants that grew from the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants' killing of a senator, leading to a future in which mutants are hunted by Sentinels.[67]

In October 2012, Vaughn left the role of director to focus on Mark Millar's Kingsman: The Secret Service (2014).[68] Singer was later announced as the film's director; it was his third directorial role in the X-Men film series.[69] In preparation for the film, Singer approached James Cameron to discuss time travel, string theory and multiverses.[70] In the same month, Richard Stammers was approached to be the visual effects supervisor, as Singer liked his work in the 2012 film Prometheus.[71]

Singer brought back most of the crew he had in X-Men and X2. In December 2012, two long-absent designers were hired: production designer John Myhre, who had only done X-Men, and costume designer Louise Mingenbach—who also did X2 and X-Men Origins: Wolverine.[72][73] In February 2013, John Ottman—who aside from X-Men, collaborated on all of Singer's works since the 1995 film The Usual Suspects—was confirmed to work on the music and the editing of the film.[74]

Casting
I decided that the next time I got myself involved in a movie that had a huge amount of attention already that I would use Twitter. As a way of connecting with fans, principally. And also as a way of clearing up misunderstandings so that people know. You know, they may hear that an actor is cast or hear somebody is going to be in it, but until I say it's so, that's the confirmation.[75]
—Bryan Singer, explaining the Twitter presence of the film
Singer used the online social networking service Twitter to announce casting of the film.[75] In November 2012, he announced that James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Jennifer Lawrence and Nicholas Hoult would reprise their roles from X-Men: First Class. Later the same month, he announced that Patrick Stewart and Ian McKellen would reprise their respective roles as the older versions of the characters played by McAvoy and Fassbender.[76][77][78] In December, Singer announced that Hugh Jackman would reprise his role as Wolverine.[79]

In January 2013, Singer announced that Anna Paquin, Shawn Ashmore, and Ellen Page would reprise their roles of Rogue, Iceman, and Kitty Pryde.[80][81] In February, Singer announced that Peter Dinklage would star in the film as the main antagonist.[82] In March, Singer announced that French actor Omar Sy had joined the cast.[83] Halle Berry said in an interview that she would reprise her role as Storm, which was followed by an announcement from Singer that Berry would be in the film.[84][85] Singer tweeted a picture of the cast, which confirmed that Daniel Cudmore would return as Colossus and that Fan Bingbing and Booboo Stewart had joined the cast.[86]

In April, Singer announced that American singer and songwriter Lady Gaga had joined the cast as Dazzler,[87] but it was later revealed as an April Fools' Day prank.[75] Singer retweeted a photograph of himself, Adan Canto, and confirmed cast members Patrick Stewart, McKellen, and Ashmore, which was followed by a confirmation from Canto that he had joined the cast.[88] In May, Singer announced that Evan Peters had been cast as Quicksilver.[89] In June, Australian actor Josh Helman was cast in a role.[90] In July, Singer tweeted a picture of actor Lucas Till on the set of the film, which confirmed that he was returning as Havok.[91] In January 2014, Evan Jonigkeit had been cast as the younger version of Toad.[92]

Filming
X-Men: Days of Future Past had a production budget of $205 million.[93] Principal photography began on April 15, 2013, at Mel's Cité du Cinema in Montreal, Canada, and ended on August 17, 2013.[94][95][96] Filming had to begin in April 2013 to accommodate the cast's individual schedules.[18] Olympic Stadium, Montreal City Hall, and McGill University were also used as filming locations.[97][98] An aerial plate unit was sent to film in Washington, D.C.[71] Additional filming took place in Montreal in November 2013 and February 2014.[99][100] According to the Calgary Herald, the film is the second most expensive produced by 20th Century Fox after Avatar (2009).[101] Comic book writer Chris Claremont said in an interview that he was consulted for the film.[102]

X-Men: Days of Future Past is the first X-Men film to be filmed in native 3D; it was shot using Arri Alexa-M cameras with Leica Prime lenses and Fujinon Zoom lenses, along with 3ality Technica TS-35 camera rigs and Stereo Image Processor (SIP) technology systems.[103][104] Director of photography Newton Thomas Sigel was asked about using Arri Alexa-M cameras; he said, "For Bryan and myself, the Alexa has been almost the gateway to getting the look we like in film". Sigel added that the Arri Alexa-M camera's small size was a big advantage to the film's main unit, which carried three 3D rigs. The film also used the Alexa XTs for the production's 2D work.[105]

Production designer John Myhre said his work load was "six months squeeze[d] down in to 3-4 months", given the sets were massive but he did not have the usual time to design and build before principal photography began. The lue underground hallways and Cerebro sets were faithful recreations of the sets seen in the first X-Men, albeit ransacked and damaged to imply the government had raided the mansion.[72] The sets had many hidden "Xs", including the staircase of the X-Mansion. Myrhe said he wanted to embrace the 1970s setting in the same way First Class embraced its 1960s setting,[18] and costume designer Louise Mingenbach also drew heavily from 1970s styles for the clothing seen in the 1973 scenes. Hoult wore corduroys, Jackman a wooden-paneled buckle and a peacock-print shirt, and McAvoy wore a brown leather jacket. Peters wore 1981-inspired clothing; this was Mingenbach's way of showing Quicksilver's irreverence for the exact time and place. In one scene, Mingenbach gave Fassbender as the younger Erik Lehnsherr a fedora as a nod to the one the character wore in the first X-Men film.[14] For the future period of the film, Mingenbach wanted a darker, slightly futuristic and tactical look for the characters. This included changing the suit Patrick Stewart had previously worn as Xavier to battle fatigues.[14]

The Sentinels had two separate versions, to depict how the earlier prototypes built by Trask in the 1970s evolved into the adaptable killing machines of the dystopian future.[106] Singer described the 1973 version as "a little fun and stylish but also a little retro", with a key element being that they are made of plastic to be unaffected by Magneto's powers. Myhre used styles from molded plastics from the 1970s to design Sentinels from that period,[18] and cited inspiration from both the cars of the decade and "those wonderful TV sets that were round with smoked glass panels". The overall style was bulky to fit "the traditional idea of a robot looks like",[106] and drew the most from the comics version, such as the purple color and a humanoid shape, while trying to stand out on its own with its retro design.[107] The robots' ability to fly was compared to a Harrier Jump Jet, as the Sentinels had vertical takeoff and could glide. Life-sized Sentinels were built by Legacy Effects to be featured on the set, and had articulated joints to be fully poseable. The sound effects averted metallic noises, while adding woof effects on the Sentinels' footsteps to display its weight on the ground.[106]

On the other hand, the future Sentinels would resemble "giant versions of Mystique" to show how their technological development was based on studying the shapeshifting mutant's DNA. Thus their design is sleek and feminine, with a body covered in mechanical scales that move during the process of adapting to a mutant's attack, while also featuring angular and dark faces to enhance the intimidation. The future robots would feature what Singer described as "biomechanical technology to transform to adapt to other mutants, to take on their physicality and some of their powers to use against mutantkind", which the director imagined to be fueled by nanotechnology and "the ability to really change things almost at a molecular level". The Sentinels' heads would also open up as an extra weapon, and for straighter combat the robots could create blades and spikes out of their limbs. The crackling sound of the robots' scales was made by rubbing riveted belts on shale rocks.[16][106]

For the future setting of the film, a set featuring a hillside monastery was built. Myhre was inspired by Chinese temples built on the sides of cliffs. The future set also featured a mixture of architectural styles from China, India, and Indonesia. Part of the set was a big wall, which was inspired by the Great Wall of China.[107]

Visual effects
X-Men: Days of Future Past had 1,311 visual effects shots produced by twelve studios. Richard Stammer served as the overall effects supervisor based on his work for Prometheus.[71] The leading company was Moving Picture Company, who created the future Sentinels and worked on the sequences involving the X-Jet and Cerebro's red virtual world.[71] The Sentinels' scaled bodies were created by adapting a tool originally developed to create hair and fur, which would later evolve into creating a proxy representation of each individual scale as a "follicle".[16] Another major contributor was Digital Domain, with effects from the 1973 portion that encompassed nearly a third of the work. These included the Sentinels, Mystique's transformations and eyes, and various digital environments. Digital augmentation turned a remote airstrip into a Vietnam prisoner camp and added Paris' famed mansard rooftops to the Montreal locations. The environment work based on Washington, D.C. required the team to study period references of the National Mall and White House, and photograph almost all of RFK Stadium to create a detailed digital replica.[108] Rising Sun Pictures created a sequence considered by many reviewers the centerpiece of the film's effects, where Quicksilver uses his super speed in the Pentagon kitchen. Depicting how, to a speedster, actions in real time come down to a virtual standstill, objects float around in slow motion. After doing a LIDAR scan of the kitchen set, the digital recreation added many computer generated props—cooking gear, cutlery, vegetables and water released by a fire sprinkler system—rendered in near microscopic detail regarding placement and lighting, particularly because the footage had to work in 3D. To simulate Quicksilver running on the walls, Evan Peters and a stunt double were filmed in both the set being suspended by a harness and on a treadmill that stood in front of a chroma key green screen. Only Peters' legs were digitally replaced.[16][109] Despite the sequence only having 29 effects shots,[71] it required nearly seven months of work from RSP's team of 70 artists.[110]

Rhythm and Hues Studios worked on Beast's transformations, the creation of Xavier's plane, and speed effects for Quicksilver. They also worked with Digital Domain on the sequence featuring the inside of the 1973 Sentinel. Mokko Studio worked on Mystique's eyes and costume fixes. Cinesite worked on the future New York City in the opening prologue along with clean-ups, wire removals, and production fixes. Fuel VFX worked on holographic effects and Havok's mutant powers. Vision Globale worked on visual effects relating to a dream and flashback sequence. Hydraulx, Lola and Method Studios handled a number of compositions and production fixes. The Third Floor worked on extensive story-boarding and visualisation.[71]

Music
Director Bryan Singer's regular collaborator John Ottman worked on the score of the film, in addition to being its editor.[111] Ottman is the first composer to score more than one film in the X-Men film series, having previously scored X2 (2003). This also marked the first time a theme from a previous X-Men film has been retained; Ottman re-used some of his themes from X2, most notably the main title theme. While Ottman retained the same style of "lyrical and build upon character themes that would weave in and out of the film and done in a straight orchestral sense" that he had used in X2, following Singer's request he tried to compose "something more 'modern'" that could be compared to other contemporary superhero scores, and not follow Henry Jackman's score for First Class. The 1970s setting inspired the inclusion of "synthesized elements with some analog synths and electric piano and bass and some guitar".[112] The film score was released on digital download on May 16, 2014, on CD on May 26, 2014, and on vinyl on August 4, 2014.[113][114][115] An expanded version of the soundtrack, including music exclusive to The Rogue Cut, was released on June 24, 2015 by Sony Classical Records.[116]

X-Men: Days of Future Past (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)
Film score by John Ottman
Released	May 26, 2014
Genre	Film score
Length	76:28
Label	Sony Classical
John Ottman chronology
Non-Stop
(2014)	X-Men: Days of Future Past (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)
(2014)	Krampus
(2015)
X-Men soundtrack chronology
The Wolverine
(2013)	X-Men: Days of Future Past
(2014)	Deadpool
(2016)
Track listing
No.	Title	Length
1.	"The Future – Main Titles"	2:44
2.	"Time's Up"	4:18
3.	"Hope (Xavier's Theme)"	4:48
4.	"I Found Them"	2:52
5.	"Saigon/Logan Arrives"	4:36
6.	"Pentagon Plan/Sneaky Mystique"	3:25
7.	"He Lost Everything"	1:51
8.	"Springing Erik"	3:33
9.	"How Was She"	1:47
10.	"All Those Voices"	3:19
11.	"Paris Pandemonium"	7:45
12.	"Contacting Raven"	1:48
13.	"Rules of Time"	3:07
14.	"Hat Rescue"	1:30
15.	"Time's Up" (Film Version)	3:34
16.	"The Attack Begins"	5:04
17.	"Join Me"	3:20
18.	"Do What You Were Made For"	2:56
19.	"I Have Faith in You/Goodbyes"	2:27
20.	"Welcome Back/End Titles"	3:58
21.	"Time in a Bottle" (Performed by Jim Croce)	2:27
22.	"The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face" (Performed by Roberta Flack)	5:20
Total length:	76:28
Release
The world premiere of X-Men: Days of Future Past occurred at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in New York City on May 10, 2014.[117][118] It was released in international markets in 2D and 3D theaters on May 21, 2014, and in the United States on May 23, 2014.[3] Premiere events were also held in London, Beijing, Moscow, Singapore, São Paulo, Melbourne, and Tokyo.[119]

Marketing

The cast of X-Men: Days of Future Past at the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con International
In June 2013, 20th Century Fox presented a set tour video of X-Men: Days of Future Past at the CineEurope conference in Barcelona; director Bryan Singer acted as the tour guide.[120] The set tour video was included with the home video release of the 2013 film The Wolverine.[121] In July 2013, Singer, writer Simon Kinberg, producers Lauren Shuler Donner and Hutch Parker, together with cast members Jennifer Lawrence, Evan Peters, Omar Sy, Ellen Page, Shawn Ashmore, Anna Paquin, Halle Berry, Ian McKellen, Patrick Stewart, Hugh Jackman, James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Nicholas Hoult, and Peter Dinklage presented at the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con International. Footage from the film was screened.[122] In August 2013, Singer presented footage from the film at the Fantasia International Film Festival.[123] In March 2014, 20th Century Fox presented footage from the film at CinemaCon.[124] In April 2014, Page presented footage from the film at the 2014 MTV Movie Awards. Kinberg and Dinklage attended WonderCon to discuss the film.[125][126] Singer withdrew from the publicity rounds for the film because of a lawsuit alleging sexual abuse filed against him.[127] In July 2014, 20th Century Fox and Oculus Rift presented a "virtual reality experience" in 2014 San Diego Comic-Con International. Attendees were given a chance to sit in a replica of Professor X's wheelchair and virtually hunt Mystique in the San Diego Convention Center.[128]

In July 2013, a mid-credits scene teasing X-Men: Days of Future Past was attached to the theatrical release of The Wolverine.[129] The scene, set two years after the events of The Wolverine, depicts Wolverine going through an airport security checkpoint while a commercial for Trask Industries plays in the background. Suddenly, Wolverine notices that all the metal objects around him start to shake and levitate. He turns around to see Magneto, who says he needs Wolverine's help to combat a threat to all mutants. When Wolverine asks Magneto why he should trust him, the people around them freeze as Xavier approaches Wolverine and assures him that Magneto is telling the truth. Adam Pockross of Yahoo! Movies described the mid-credits scene as the coolest part of The Wolverine and wrote, "Boom! And that's how you tease the next film: by giving us so much to chew on, yet so few answers".[130]

The first official trailer for X-Men: Days of Future Past was released in October 2013.[131] Jason Callina of Herald News gave the trailer a positive response, saying, "it is fantastic to see characters that I grew up with in the flesh ... we still have to wait till the end of May to see if Fox succeeded, but for now they have my interest".[132] Ben Child of The Guardian criticized the trailer for the number of characters that would appear in the film. Child wrote, "overloading the movie with superheroes might please fans of the comic books, but the rest of us will be chewing on our own spleens when the umpteenth brightly coloured dude turns up to spout one line of dialogue, then drop off the map".[133]

A mid-credits scene teasing X-Men: Days of Future Past was attached to the theatrical release of The Amazing Spider-Man 2 in April 2014. In the scene, which is set during the Vietnam War, Mystique tries to infiltrate a military camp led by William Stryker to recruit fellow mutants Havok, Ink, and Toad. The Amazing Spider-Man 2 director Marc Webb had an existing contract with Fox Searchlight Pictures to direct another film following 500 Days of Summer (2009). After The Amazing Spider-Man, Webb's negotiations with Sony Pictures Entertainment stalled because of his commitment to Fox. Fox eventually agreed to allow Webb to direct the sequel of The Amazing Spider-Man, and in exchange, Sony promoted the X-Men film without charge.[134] In addition, three viral websites were launched before the release of the film—Trask-Industries.com in July 2013, TheBentBullet.com in November 2013 and 25Moments.com in April 2014.[135][136][137] To further promote the film, Jackman made a guest appearance on the April 28, 2014, episode of WWE Raw.[138][139] The segment received mixed reactions.[140]

Promotional partners
In July 2013, CKE Restaurants and 20th Century Fox announced a promotional partnership for the theatrical release of X-Men: Days of Future Past. The promotion included advertising, in-restaurant merchandising, collectors' cups, and a film-themed burger, the Western "X-Tra" Bacon Thickburger,[141] sold it CKE Restaurants outlets Hardee's and Carl's Jr.. Zachary Eller, senior vice president of marketing partnerships & promotions at 20th Century Fox, said, "their fun and irreverent advertising campaigns are a great fit with our film and we couldn't be more thrilled to join together to feed mutants everywhere!"[142]

Mountain Dew partnered with the film to promote it globally; the promotion included prizes, a television commercial, online exclusives, in-store and in-theater advertisements, and commemorative packaging featuring X-Men characters from future and past. Anna Roca, senior vice president of international promotions at 20th Century Fox, stated, "The adventurous, energetic attitude of [Mountain Dew's] fan base mirrors the franchise's own—and their international reach helps bring our beloved mutants to more corners of the world than ever before".[143]

In March 2014, British train operator Virgin Trains West Coast revinyled a Class 390 Pendolino train, featuring the film characters on the carriages. It was launched at London Euston station with Hugh Jackman and James McAvoy attending the launch.[144][145]

Kia Motors collaborated with 20th Century Fox to promote the home media release of the film with a Wolverine-themed Sorento. The SUV made its debut at the 2015 Australian Open, with a series of videos featuring Rafael Nadal teaming up with the X-Men to save the tennis event from the Sentinels.[146]

Home media
In June 2014, cable network FX acquired the television rights to X-Men: Days of Future Past.[147] The film was released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on digital download on September 23, 2014, and on DVD, Blu-ray and Blu-ray 3D on October 14, 2014.[148] In the United Kingdom, it was released on November 10, 2014.[149] Three versions were released; a Deluxe Edition containing the Blu-ray 3D, Blu-ray and digital download; a Blu-ray and digital download combo pack; and a single-disc DVD.[148]

The Rogue Cut
20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released an alternate version of the film, titled The Rogue Cut, on July 14, 2015. It added 17 minutes of previously unused footage, including a subplot involving Anna Paquin's character Rogue, whose role was reduced to a brief cameo in the theatrical release.[150] The Rogue Cut was also screened at the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International.[151]

In the Rogue Cut, Rogue's role is more consequential, and the narrative is more complex: when Kitty Pryde is accidentally wounded after Wolverine's consciousness experiences a phase between past and future from seeing Stryker in 1973, Bobby Drake (Iceman) proposes breaking into the heavily guarded remains of Cerebro at the former X-Mansion, the one place where Xavier's mind cannot reach others from the outside, in order to rescue Rogue, who is being held captive there. Xavier, Magneto, and Iceman succeed in rescuing Rogue, but at the cost of Iceman's life. Rogue uses her power to take over for Kitty in regards to keeping Wolverine's mind in 1973, for the remaining time until the moment history is changed, with a suggestion that Wolverine is aware of the switch as he appears to feel Rogue's presence. The Sentinels are able to find the X-Men through a tracking device inside a Sentinel's hand that was severed from the X-Jet during their escape. In another major scene, Mystique stops at the X-Mansion the night before the Sentinel-unveiling ceremony, revisits her previous romance with Beast, and destroys Cerebro the following morning in order to prevent Xavier from finding her. A new mid-credits scene shows Bolivar Trask imprisoned at Magneto's former prison cell beneath the Pentagon for selling military secrets to foreign countries.

Reception

Hugh Jackman and Fan Bingbing at the premiere of the film in Singapore
Box office
Worldwide, X-Men: Days of Future Past earned $262.8 million during its opening weekend, the highest worldwide opening weekend for an X-Men film.[152] The film grossed $233.9 million in the US and Canada, and $513.9 million in other markets, for a worldwide gross of $747.9 million, making it the highest-grossing entry in the X-Men film series before being surpassed by Deadpool two years later.[3] Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $77.3 million, when factoring together "production budgets, P&A, talent participations and other costs, with box office grosses, and ancillary revenues from VOD to DVD and TV," placing it 16th on their list of 2014's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[5]

In the United States and Canada, the film earned $8.1 million from Thursday night showings, which is the highest late-night opening for an X-Men film.[153] It was also the highest-grossing film during its opening weekend, earning $90.8 million, which made it the second-highest opening weekend of the series, at the time, behind X-Men: The Last Stand ($102.8 million).[154] During the four-day Memorial Day weekend, it earned $110.6 million.[154] The audience was 56% male and 59% were older than 25.[154]

Elsewhere, the film was the highest-grossing film during its opening weekend, taking $172 million, making it Fox International's highest opening weekend.[155] The film's highest-grossing debuts were in China, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Malta.[156] It was also the highest-grossing debut for a 20th Century Fox film in 11 markets, including South Korea, Brazil, the Philippines, and India.[154] It became the highest-grossing X-Men film in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, Malaysia, Lebanon, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, Sweden, Thailand, the United Kingdom & Ireland, and Venezuela.[156][157][158][159][160][161][162]

Critical response
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes X-Men: Days of Future Past holds an approval rating of 90% based on 320 reviews, with an average rating of 7.53/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "X-Men: Days of Future Past combines the best elements of the series to produce a satisfyingly fast-paced outing that ranks among the franchise's finest installments."[163] On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 75 out of 100, based on 44 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[164] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.[154]

Sean O'Connell of CinemaBlend gave the film four and a half stars out of five, and said it was "the greatest, most complete and staggeringly entertaining [X-Men film] to date".[165] Empire gave it four out of five stars and called it, "The best X-Men film since the second one".[166] Steve Rose of The Guardian rated the film three stars out of five; he said, "Non-devotees might struggle, but director Bryan Singer whips up the action towards a symphonic climax".[167] David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter said, "While it's more dramatically diffuse than the reboot and lacks a definitive villain, the new film is shot through with a stirring reverence for the Marvel Comics characters and their universe".[168] Justin Chang of Variety said, "If the characters' quandaries at times feel overly circumscribed, they're also advanced with a bracing emotional directness, devoid of either cynicism or sentimentalism, that touches genuine chords of feeling over the course of the film's fleet 130-minute [sic] running time".[169] In 2016, James Charisma of Playboy ranked the film #8 on a list of "15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals".[170]

In contrast, Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph rated the film two stars out of five and called the plot "a curate's egg, thoroughly scrambled". He concluded, "The film squanders both of its casts, reeling from one fumbled set-piece to the next. It seems to have been constructed in a stupor, and you watch in a daze of future past".[171] Simon Abrams, writing for RogerEbert.com, gave the film two-and-a-half stars out of four, calling it a "visually driven and paint-by-numbers plot". Abrams was critical of the undeveloped subplots that built up because the film's pacing left little time to develop each element of the story set in the 1970s.[172]

Following criticism of X-Men: The Last Stand for killing off major characters such as Professor Charles Xavier, Cyclops, and Jean Grey, X-Men: Days of Future Past has subsequently been viewed by some critics as a revision of those controversial plot elements in X-Men: The Last Stand.[173]

Accolades
Year	Award	Category	Recipient	Result	Ref.
2014	Golden Trailer Awards	Best Summer 2014 Blockbuster Trailer	X-Men: Days of Future Past	Nominated	[174]
Teen Choice Awards	Choice Movie: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Nominated	[175][176]
Choice Movie Actress: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Halle Berry	Nominated
Jennifer Lawrence	Won
Choice Movie: Villain	Michael Fassbender	Nominated
Choice Movie: Scene Stealer	Nicholas Hoult	Nominated
Ellen Page	Nominated
Young Hollywood Awards	Best Cast Chemistry – Film	X-Men: Days of Future Past	Nominated	[178]
Favorite Flick	Nominated
Fan Favorite Actor – Female	Jennifer Lawrence	Nominated
Super Superhero	Nicholas Hoult	Nominated
2015	People's Choice Awards	Favorite Movie	X-Men: Days of Future Past	Nominated	[179]
Favorite Action Movie	Nominated
Screen Actors Guild Awards	Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Motion Picture	Nominated	[180]
AACTA Awards	Best Visual Effects	Nominated	[181]
Visual Effects Society Awards	Outstanding Visual Effects in a Visual Effects Driven Photoreal/Live Action Feature Motion Picture	Ricard Stammers, Blondel Aidoo, Lou Pecora, Anders Landlangs, Cameron Waldbauer	Nominated	[182]
Outstanding Virtual Cinematography in a Photoreal/Live Action Feature Motion Picture	Austin Bonang, Casey Schatz, Dennis Jones, Newton Thomas Sigel for the "Kitchen Scene"	Won
Outstanding Effects Simulations in a Photoreal/Live Action Feature Motion Picture	Adam Paschke, Premamurti Paetsch, Sam Hancock, Timmy Lundin for "Quicksilver Pentagon Kitchen"	Won
British Academy Film Awards	Best Special Visual Effects	X-Men: Days of Future Past	Nominated	[183]
Academy Awards	Best Visual Effects	Nominated	[184]
Saturn Awards	Best Comic-to-Film Motion Picture	Nominated	[185]
Best Director	Bryan Singer	Nominated
Best Editing	John Ottman	Nominated
Best Costume	Louise Mingenbach	Nominated
Best Make-up	Adrien Morot, Norma Hill-Patton	Nominated
Kids' Choice Awards	Favorite Female Action Star	Halle Berry	Nominated	[186]
Ellen Page	Nominated
Favorite Male Action Star	Hugh Jackman	Nominated
Favorite Movie Actor	Nominated
MTV Movie Awards	Best Villain	Peter Dinklage	Nominated	[187]
Empire Awards	Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy	X-Men: Days of Future Past	Won	[188]
2016	Saturn Awards	Best DVD/BD Special Edition	X-Men: Days of Future Past (The Rogue Cut)	Won	[189]
See also
	Film portal
flag	United States portal
icon	Speculative fiction portal
2014 in film
List of American films of 2014
List of British films of 2014
List of films featuring drones
List of films featuring time loops
List of highest-grossing films
References
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past (12A)". British Board of Film Classification. May 9, 2014. Archived from the original on June 8, 2014. Retrieved May 9, 2014.
 "X-Men Days of Future Past (2014)". British Film Institute. Retrieved September 24, 2018.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 2014 Feature Film Study (PDF) (Report). FilmL.A. Inc. p. 17. Retrieved November 11, 2017.
 Fleming Jr., Mike (March 10, 2015). "No. 16 'X-Men: Days Of Future Past' – 2014 Most Valuable Blockbuster Movie Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 17, 2019.
 Ford, Rebecca; Kit, Borys (December 5, 2013). "Release Date Announced for X-Men: Apocalypse". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2016.
 Zalben, Alex (May 23, 2014). "'X-Men: Days Of Future Past' Post-Credits Scene Explained". MTV.
 Kendrick, Ben (May 29, 2014). "'X-Men: Days of Future Past' End Credits Scene Explained". ScreenRant.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 19, 2014). "Hugh Jackman Talks Reuniting with Bryan Singer, Battling Sentinels, How Long He'll Play Wolverine, and More on the Set of X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST". Collider. Retrieved May 29, 2014.
 "Bay City Roller - X-Men: Days Of Future Past Trailer Breakdown". Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 "Simon Kinberg interview: X-Men: Days Of Future Past". Den of Geek. Dennis Publishing Limited. May 28, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2014.
 Trumbore, Dave. "Comic-Con: 'X-Men: Days of Future Past' Interview Highlights". Retrieved July 19, 2013.
 Malkin, Marc (February 26, 2013). "Jennifer Lawrence: "I'm Sinking Into a Bit of Depression"". E! News. Retrieved January 30, 2014.
 Stelios, Phili (May 23, 2014). "GQ+A with Louise Mingenbach: The Days of Future Past Costume Designer on X-Men". GQ. Retrieved June 22, 2014.
 Warner, Kara (April 22, 2014). "How Jennifer Lawrence's Easier 'X-Men' Costume Might Lead to Mystique Spinoff". Yahoo! Movies. Retrieved April 30, 2014.
 Failes, Ian (May 27, 2014). "Future threat – X-Men: Days of Future Past". Fxguide. Retrieved October 16, 2014.
 "Halle Berry: Revealing and shocking Storm developments in 'Days of Future Past". August 2, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2013.
 Weintruab, Steve. "X-Men: Days of Future Past Set Visit: 90 Thing to Know About X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved June 23, 2014.
 "Classic X-Men set for sequel cameo". October 28, 2013. Archived from the original on March 23, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2014.
 Plumb, Ali. "X-Men: Days Of Future Past's Secrets Explained". Empire. Retrieved February 8, 2015.
 Wigler, Josh (June 23, 2014). "How 'X-Men: Days Of Future Past' Made One Of Its Top-Secret Cameos Possible". MTV.com. Retrieved February 8, 2015.
 Plumb, Ali (December 22, 2013). "Anna Paquin's Rogue Cut Out Of X-Men: Days Of Future Past". Empireonline.com. Retrieved May 1, 2015.
 Plumb, Ali (January 30, 2014). "Bryan Singer On Rogue Being Cut From X-Men: Days of Future Past". Empireonline.com. Retrieved January 30, 2014.
 "Anna Paquin's Rogue Will be Present for X-Men: Days of Future Past". April 16, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2014.
 "Fox to Add Anna Paquin Back to 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". September 25, 2014. Retrieved March 14, 2016.
 "X-Men Writer On Apocalypse Plot Twists, Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch And Much More (Exclusive)". Yahoo! UK. September 26, 2014. Retrieved September 29, 2014.
 Adam B. Vary. "Anna Paquin Will Be In "X-Men: Days Of Future Past" After All". Buzzfeed.com. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
 "Anna Paquin Will Appear In X-Men: Days Of Future Past &#124, Movie News &#124, Empire". Empireonline.com. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
 Brent McKnight. "Why Anna Paquin Didn't Mind Being Cut From X-Men: Days Of Future Past". cinemablend.com. Retrieved November 30, 2015.
 Terri Schwartz. "X-MEN: ANNA PAQUIN IS GAME TO COME BACK FOR MORE". ign.com. Retrieved November 30, 2015.
 "Ellen Page as Kitty". Retrieved February 21, 2014.
 Plumb, Ali (July 31, 2013). "Exclusive: Bryan Singer Talks X-Men: Days of Future Past". Empire Magazine. Retrieved August 4, 2013.
 Perry, Spencer (October 1, 2013). "Peter Dinklage Talks Bolivar Trask in X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved October 2, 2013.
 "X-Men Days of Future Past Star Shawn Ashmore: I've Been Waiting to See Bobby Do His Thing". May 13, 2014. Retrieved June 22, 2014.
 "The New Mutants". Retrieved November 2, 2013.
 Maytum, Matt (July 21, 2013). "X-Men: Days of Future Past: 10 Things We Learned at Comic-Con 2013". Retrieved September 1, 2013.
 Collura, Scott (March 13, 2014). "Turns out Juggernaut Was Originally in X-Men: Days of Future Past". IGN. Retrieved May 26, 2014.
 Lee, Stephanie (May 30, 2014). "X-Men: Days of Future Past Interview with Daniel Cudmore". Retrieved June 22, 2014.
 "Fan Bingbing excited to be part of the X-Men movies - Movies &#124, The Star Online". Thestar.com.my. Retrieved May 22, 2014.
 "Empire X-Men: Days Of Future Past Exclusive - Sunspot Cover". Retrieved January 30, 2014.
 Perry, Spencer (May 18, 2014). "Interview: Adan Canto Talks Sunspot in X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved June 23, 2014.
 White, Brett (March 21, 2013). "X-Men: Days of Future Past: Booboo Stewart Says Role Is 'A Dream Come True'". Retrieved June 23, 2014.
 https://www.cbc.ca/amp/1.2938097
 "Actor revealed from X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST end credits teaser". May 27, 2014. Retrieved May 28, 2014.
 Beck, Marilyn & Stacy Jenel Smith (August 13, 2006). "Major renegotiations possible stumbling block for new 'X-Men'". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on June 16, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007.
 Sanchez, Robert (November 11, 2006). "Exclusive Interview: Part II With Mega Producer Lauren Shuler Donner". IESB.net. Archived from the original on December 18, 2007. Retrieved August 6, 2007.
 Boucher, Geoff (March 18, 2010). "Bryan Singer on 'X-Men: First Class': It's got to be about Magneto and Professor X". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 20, 2010.
 Caron, Nathalie (March 29, 2011). "Producer reveals there WILL be an X-Men 4 and 5". Blastr. Retrieved June 24, 2011.
 Fleming, Mike (March 26, 2010). "Bryan Singer Producing 'X-Men: First Class'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 11, 2013. Retrieved July 9, 2010.
 De Semlyen, Nick (October 16, 2009). "The Future of the X-Men Franchise: X-Men: First Class". Empire. Retrieved December 18, 2010.
 Child, Ben (January 31, 2012). "Matthew Vaughn to direct sequel to X-Men: First Class". The Guardian. UK.
 Leyland, Matthew (April 13, 2011). "X-Men: First Class sequel plans revealed". totalfilm.com. Retrieved May 11, 2011.
 "'X-Men: First Class' Sequel Ideas Emerge". Screenrant.com. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
 Zeitchik, Steven (June 7, 2011). "Bryan Singer: An 'X-Men: First Class' sequel could be set in Vietnam, or amid the civil rights movement - latimes.com". Latimesblogs.latimes.com. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 Tilly, Chris (May 5, 2011). "Wolverine to Join X-Men: First Class 2?". IGN. Archived from the original on August 17, 2012. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 "THE PAST HAS A HABIT" Page 94~100 Empire Magazine May 2014
 XMF, Anthony (December 3, 2013). "Kinberg: How First Class 2 became Days of Future Past". Retrieved December 27, 2013.
 "Simon Kinberg on Kitty Pryde over Rachel Summers' role in X-Men: Days of Future Past". June 17, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2014.
 O'Connell, Sean (June 17, 2014). "Juggernaut Almost Looked Like This in X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved June 22, 2014.
 Shaw-Williams, Hannah (June 18, 2014). "X-Men: Days of Future Past Concept Art Reveals Future Jubilee & Juggernaut". Retrieved June 22, 2014.
 Lesnick, Silas (March 20, 2014). "Gambit and Nightcrawler Heading to X-Men: Apocalypse?". Retrieved November 26, 2014.
 "Simon Kinberg: X-Men: Apocalypse Completes the First Class Trilogy". September 26, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2014.
 Lambie, Ryan (February 19, 2014). "Bryan Singer interview: X-Men. Days of Future Past, Star Trek and more". Retrieved June 25, 2014.
 Wilding, Josh (November 3, 2011). "Exclusive: Simon Kinberg Writing X-Men: First Class Sequel". Superherohype.com. Retrieved November 3, 2011.
 "The X-Men: First Class Sequel Set for July 18, 2014". May 31, 2012. Retrieved February 14, 2013.
 "20th Century Fox Sets Dates for Independence Day 2, Assassin's Creed, Apes and X-Men!". June 20, 2013. Retrieved June 21, 2013.
 Lesnick, Silas (August 1, 2012). "The First Class Sequel is Officially X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved February 14, 2013.
 Trumbore, Dave (October 25, 2012). "Matthew Vaughn Out as Director of X-MEN: FIRST CLASS Sequel, X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST; Bryan Singer May Replace Him". Collider. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 Silas Lesnick (October 30, 2012). "Bryan Singer Officially Set for X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved February 14, 2013.
 Spencer, Perry (January 28, 2013). "Bryan Singer Talks X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved April 18, 2013.
 Frei, Vincent (May 23, 2014). "X-Men—Days of Future Past: Richard Stammers—Production VFX Supervisor". Retrieved May 31, 2014.
 Weintraub, Steve (April 30, 2014). "Production Designer John Myhre Talks Designing the Sentinels, Creating the First "Really Epic X-MEN", and More on the Set of X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST". Collider. Retrieved March 24, 2016.
 Nicholson, Max (November 16, 2012). "Singer Promises "No Leather Suits" in X-Men: Days of Future Past". IGN. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 "Bryan Singer & Nicholas Hoult Talk 'X-Men: Days of Future Past' – EXCLUSIVE!". February 28, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 —Rosen, Christopher (April 1, 2013). "Lady Gaga in 'X-Men: Days of Future Past' as Dazzler? Bryan Singer Tweets Casting Prank on April Fools' Day". Huffington Post. Retrieved April 7, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (November 27, 2012). "I'd like to officially welcome back James McAvoy, Jennifer Lawrence, Michael Fassbender, & Nicholas Hoult to #XMEN for #DaysOfFuturePast". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (November 27, 2012). "Thrilled to announce @ianmckellen118 & @SirPatStew are joining the cast of #XMEN #DaysOfFuturePast #magneto #professorX More to come ..." Twitter. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
 Vary, Adam B. (November 27, 2012). "Ian McKellan, Patrick Stewart returning for 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 27, 2012.
 Singer, Bryan (December 18, 2012). "I would officially like to welcome @RealHughJackman to the cast of #Xmen Days of Future Past. Very excited! More to come ..." Twitter. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
 Keyes, Rob (January 26, 2013). "Iceman, Kitty Pryde & Rogue Return For 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". Screenrant.
 Singer, Bryan (January 26, 2013). "Very excited to welcome #annapaquin, @ellenpage & @shawnrashmore to #XMen #DaysofFuturePast – thank you @BrettRatner for letting them live!". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (February 13, 2013). "Officially like to welcome #PeterDinklage from #GameOfThrones to #XMEN #DaysofFuturePast Very very excited!". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (March 2, 2013). "Thrilled to welcome the brilliant #OmarSy from the amazing film #TheIntouchables to the cast of #Xmen #DaysofFuturePast!". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
 Sullivan, Erin (March 3, 2013). "Halle Berry: I'm In for X-Men: Days of Future Past". Access Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (March 4, 2013). "Twitter / BryanSinger: Couldn't be more excited that #HalleBerry has joined the cast of #XMen #DaysofFuturePast. Hopefully she can improve the weather in Montreal". Retrieved April 19, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (March 15, 2013). "3 #Oscars, 6 #GoldenGlobes, 1 #BAFTA, 2 #Emmys, 2 #Tonys, 5 #Oliviers, 1 #Ceaser – Now let's blow s**t up! #XMEN". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (April 1, 2013). "Twitter / Bryan Singer: I can finally announce @ladygaga is joining #XMen #DaysofFuturePast as Dazzler. One of my all-time favorite characters. Can't wait!". Retrieved April 7, 2013.
 Eggertsen, Chris (April 21, 2013). "'The Following's' Adan Canto joins 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". Retrieved April 22, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (May 23, 2013). "Thrilled to say #EvanPeters is joining #XMen #DaysOfFuturePast as #Quicksilver". Twitter. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 Sneider, Jeff (June 25, 2013). "'X-Men: Days of Future Past' Casts Rising Aussie Actor Josh Helman (Exclusive)". The Wrap. Retrieved June 25, 2013.
 Singer, Bryan (July 15, 2013). ""Mankind must put an end to war before war puts an end to mankind." -JFK @lucastill #xmen #DaysOfFuturePast". Twitter. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
 "Which Classic 'X-Men' Character Is Making A 'Days Of Future Past' Comeback?".
 "2014 Feature Film Study" (pdf). FilmL.A. p. 6. Retrieved March 30, 2018.
 Wigler, Josh (November 9, 2012). "'X-Men: Days Of Future Past' Shoots In April 2013". MTV Splash Page. Archived from the original on March 11, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2013.
 Perry, Spencer (August 17, 2013). "Production Wraps on X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved August 18, 2013.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 25, 2013). "Bryan Singer Talks JACK THE GIANT SLAYER, Re-Writing the Film in Pre-Production, X-MEN: FIRST CLASS, BATTLESTAR GALACTICA, and More". Collider.com. Retrieved February 25, 2013.
 QMI Agency (April 28, 2013). "Montreal invaded by 'X-Men'". Retrieved May 14, 2013.
 Perry, Spencer (June 4, 2013). "Tensions Rise in New Set Photo From X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved June 5, 2013.
 "X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST HEADS BACK TO MONTREAL FOR RESHOOTS".
 "Beast Gets To Work In New X-Men: Days Of Future Past Set Photo". Retrieved April 2, 2014.
 McMillan, Greame (November 19, 2013). "Report: 'Days of Future Past' Second Only to 'Avatar' in Cost to Fox". Retrieved December 29, 2013.
 "X-Icon Chris Claremont Talks X-Men's 50th, 'Days of Future Past'". MTV. August 15, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2014.
 "Twitter / definitionmags: X-Men: Days of Future Past". March 23, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 Kevin Jagernauth (February 13, 2013). "Bryan Singer To Shoot 'X-Men: Days Of Future Past' In 3D". Archived from the original on June 5, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2013.
 "ARRI Group: News". Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved June 22, 2014.
 Sentinels: For a Secure Future (Featurette). X-Men: Days of Future Past Blu-ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. 2014.
 Weintraub, Steve. "John Myhre Talks X-Men Days of Future Past, Sentinels and Easter Eggs". Retrieved June 24, 2014.
 Frei, Vincent (May 28, 2014). "X-MEN – DAYS OF FUTURE PAST: Lou Pecora – VFX". Art of VFX. Retrieved February 8, 2015.
 "Rising Sun Pictures Makes Time Stand Still in "X-Men: Days of Future Past"". Rising Sun Pictures. Retrieved January 17, 2015.
 "Oscar nominations 2015: Adelaide visual effects supervisor 'shocked' by Oscar nomination". ABC Online. January 17, 2015.
 Perry, Spencer (April 2, 2013). "John Ottman to Score X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved April 18, 2013.
 Tapley, Kristopher (May 22, 2014). "John Ottman on the balancing act of editing and scoring 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". HitFix. Retrieved October 18, 2014.
 "iTunes - Music - X-Men: Days of Future Past (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by John Ottman". Itunes.apple.com. May 16, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2014.
 Amazon UK (May 3, 2014). "John Ottman's X-Men: Days of Future Past Soundtrack". Retrieved May 3, 2014.
 "Original Soundtrack - X-Men:Days of Future Past". Retrieved August 29, 2014.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past - The Rogue Cut Soundtrack Details". June 24, 2015. Retrieved June 26, 2015.
 Kilday, Gregg (April 18, 2014). "Bryan Singer Accusations Affect Marketing Plans for Next 'X-Men,' 'Black Box'". The Hollywood Reporter. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved April 22, 2014.
 Marianne Garvey; BrianNiemietz (May 12, 2014). "'X-Men: Days of Future Past' stars assemble in New York premiere". Confidenti@l. Daily News. Retrieved May 14, 2014.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past - New York, London, Beijing, Moscow, Singapore, Sao ..." May 29, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014.
 "Directors Tease Captain America: The Winter Soldier and X-Men: Days of Future Past". Comingsoon.net. June 27, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2015.
 Perry, Spencer (October 1, 2013). "The Wolverine Coming to DVD and Blu-ray December 3". Retrieved October 5, 2013.
 "Comic-Con: 20th Century Fox Panel Live Blog". July 20, 2013. Retrieved July 21, 2013.
 "Rated "X": A Night With Bryan Singer". Retrieved July 10, 2013.
 Douglas, Edward (March 27, 2014). "CinemaCon: Fox Shows New X-Men, Apes and Secret Service Footage". Retrieved March 28, 2014.
 Perry, Spencer (April 9, 2014). "Sneak Peek for X-Men: Days of Future Past Clip Debuts". SuperHeroHype. Retrieved May 3, 2014.
 Kit, Borys (April 19, 2014). "WonderCon: No Mention of Bryan Singer at 'X-Men' Panel". Retrieved April 20, 2014.
 "Bryan Singer pulls out of X-Men launch amid sex abuse allegations". News.com.au. April 26, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014.
 "Comic-Con: Hunt Down Mystique in the X-Men Virtual Reality Experience". July 22, 2014. Retrieved July 25, 2014.
 Douglas, Edward (July 17, 2013). "Exclusive: Hugh Jackman on X-Men: Days of Future Past". Retrieved July 18, 2013.
 Pockross, Adam (July 29, 2013). "'Wolverine' Post-Credits Sequence Opens Door For Next X-Men Film". Retrieved October 5, 2013.
 Mikael Angelo Francisco (October 30, 2013). "X-Men: Days of Future Past official trailer goes live". Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 Jason Callina (October 29, 2013). "X-Men Days of Future Past Trailer". Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 Child, Ben (October 31, 2013). "X-Men: Days of Future Past trailer: an overdose of superheroes?". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 Setoodeh, Ramin (April 16, 2014). "The Amazing Spider-Man 2: Secret Contract Got X-Men Coda in Film". Retrieved April 18, 2014.
 Perry, Spencer (July 18, 2013). "Comic-Con: X-Men: Days of Future Past Viral Campaign Kicks Off!". Retrieved July 19, 2013.
 Lesnick, Silas (November 25, 2013). "X-Men: Days of Future Past Explores Magneto's Involvement in the JFK Assassination". Retrieved November 26, 2013.
 "An X-Men: Days of Future Interactive Timeline Explores Future History". Superhero Hype. April 11, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2014.
 "Raw guest star Hugh Jackman is confronted by "Magneto": Raw, April 28, 2014". WWE. April 28, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014.
 Payne, Marissa (April 28, 2014). "'X-Men' star Hugh Jackman will probably punch someone on WWE Raw tonight". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 29, 2014.
 Payne, Marissa (April 29, 2014). "You either loved or hated Hugh Jackman on WWE Raw". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 30, 2014.
 "Carl's Jr. and Hardee's Fight X-Traordinary Hunger with Help from X-Men and X-Tra Bacon". March 18, 2014. Retrieved April 1, 2014.
 Perry, Spencer (July 20, 2013). "Comic-Con: X-Men: Days of Future Past Partners with Carl's Jr. and Hardee's". Retrieved July 21, 2013.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past teams up with Mountain Dew for promotion". March 17, 2014. Archived from the original on March 18, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
 "Jackman, McAvoy name X-Men train". April 1, 2013. Retrieved April 1, 2013.
 Meet the X-Mendolino Rail April 30, 2014
 Joseph, Noah (November 24, 2014). "Kia Sorento bares its claws for X-Men Special Edition". Autoblog.com. Retrieved September 28, 2015.
 "FX Acquires '22 Jump Street, Fault in Our Stars, X-Men: Days of Future Past, Dragon 2 & More". June 19, 2014. Retrieved June 22, 2014.
 Perry, Spencer (July 23, 2014). "X-Men: Days of Future Past Hitting DVD and Blu-ray in October". Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 "X-Men: Cerebro Helmet Complete Collection Incl. Days of Future Past Exclusive to Amazon.co.uk". Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Evry, Max (May 5, 2015). "Bryan Singer Reveals X-Men: Days of Future Past Rogue Cut Release Date". Periscope via SuperheroHype.com. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
 There Will Be “X-Men: Days of Future Past Rogue Cut” Screening at San Diego Comic-Con! Here’s Details! Rama's Screen, June 22, 2015
 "All Time Worldwide Opening Record at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 29, 2014.
 Reyes, Mike (May 23, 2014). "X-Men: Days Of Future Past Banks $8.1 Million Through Late Thursday Showings". Retrieved August 1, 2014.
 "Weekend Report: 'X-Men' Rules Memorial Day, Falls Short of Franchise Record". Box Office Mojo. May 25, 2014. Retrieved May 27, 2014.
 "GLOBAL: 'X-Men: Days Of Future Past' Breaks 'Avatar' Record As Fox International's Biggest Overseas Debut Of All Time". May 25, 2014. Archived from the original on June 1, 2014. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014)—International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 "X-Men (2000)—International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "X2: X-Men United (2003)—International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "X-Men: The Last Stand (2006)—International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "X-Men: Origins Wolverine (2009)—International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "X-Men: First Class (2011)—International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "The Wolverine (2013)—International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved December 22, 2019.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved July 19, 2014.
 O'Connell, Sean. "X-Men: Days of Future Past Review - CinemaBlend.com". Cinema Blend. Retrieved July 4, 2014.
 Thomas, William. "Empire's X-Men: Days of Future Past Movie Review". Empire. Retrieved June 14, 2014.
 Rose, Steve. "X-Men: Days of Future Past review - 'like trying to follow two games of chess at once' | Film". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
 Rooney, David (May 12, 2014). "X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 21, 2014.
 Chang, Justin (May 12, 2014). "Film Review: 'X-Men: Days of Future Past'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
 Charisma, James (March 15, 2016). "Revenge of the Movie: 15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals". Playboy. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past, review: 'A mess of mutants'". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past, review by Simon Abrams for rogerebert.com". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved June 6, 2014.
 "Five Ways "X-Men: Days of Future Past Fixes the Franchise's Previous Mistakes". Complex.
 "The 15th Annual Golden Trailer Award Nominees". goldentrailer.com. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved June 19, 2014.
 "Teen Choice Awards 2014 Nominees Revealed!". Yahoo! Movies. June 18, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2014.
 "Second Wave of Nominations for 'Teen Choice 2014' Announced". July 17, 2014. Retrieved July 17, 2014.
 "2014 Young Hollywood Awards Winners [Recap/Review]". Liberty Voice. Retrieved July 29, 2014.
 "2014 Young Hollywood Awards Nominees". June 26, 2014. Retrieved July 6, 2014.
 "NOMINEES & WINNERS". 2015. Retrieved January 8, 2015.
 "SAG Awards 2015 Nominations". December 10, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014.
 "AFI AACTA The Awards 4th AACTA Awards Visual Effects and Animation". Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 "13th Annual VES Award Recipients". Visual Effects Society. February 4, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
 "Baftas 2015: winners in full". February 9, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 "X-Men: Days of Future Past: Visual Effects - Nominees - Oscars 2015". Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 Perry, Spencer (March 3, 2015). "Captain America: The Winter Soldier Nominated for 11 Saturn Awards". Retrieved March 4, 2015.
 Daley, Megan. "Meryl Streep gets her first Kids' Choice Awards nomination". Retrieved February 23, 2015.
 Perry, Spencer (March 4, 2015). "Guardians of the Galaxy Lands 7 MTV Movie Awards Nominations". Retrieved March 5, 2015.
 "Vote Now For The Jameson Empire Awards 2015". Retrieved March 15, 2015.
 Cohen, David S. (June 23, 2016). "'The Force Awakens' Rings Up Eight Saturn Awards". Retrieved June 23, 2016.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: X-Men: Days of Future Past
Official website
X-Men: Days of Future Past on IMDb
X-Men: Days of Future Past at AllMovie
X-Men: Days of Future Past at Rotten Tomatoes
Links to related articles
Categories: 2014 filmsEnglish-language filmsAmerican filmsBritish films2014 3D films2014 science fiction films2010s adventure films2010s superhero films2010s science fiction action films20th Century Fox filmsAlternate timeline filmsAmerican alternate history filmsAmerican 3D filmsBritish 3D filmsAmerican science fiction action filmsAmerican sequel filmsBritish sequel filmsAmerican superhero filmsApocalyptic filmsBad Hat Harry Productions filmsDrone filmsDystopian filmsFilms scored by John OttmanFilms about shapeshiftingFilms about time travelFilms based on works by Chris ClaremontFilms directed by Bryan SingerFilms produced by Bryan SingerFilms produced by Lauren Shuler DonnerFilms produced by Simon KinbergFilms set in New York CityFilms set in Westchester County, New YorkFilms set in MoscowFilms set in ChinaFilms set in 1973Films set in 2023Films set in the White HouseFilms set in VietnamFilms set in ParisFilms shot in MontrealHuman experimentation in fictionFiction about mind controlAmerican nonlinear narrative filmsBritish nonlinear narrative filmsCultural depictions of Richard NixonScience fiction adventure filmsFilms with screenplays by Jane GoldmanFilms with screenplays by Matthew VaughnFilms with screenplays by Simon KinbergTeen superhero filmsTSG Entertainment filmsVietnam War filmsX-Men (film series)Post-apocalyptic films
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
Español
Русский
Português
中文
فارسی
العربية
Bahasa Indonesia
हिन्दी
Bahasa Melayu
40 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 14 July 2020, at 02:53 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

X-Men: First Class (comics)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Not to be confused with X-Men: First Class.

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "X-Men: First Class" comics – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
X-Men: First Class

Cover art for X-Men: First Class (vol. 1) #1.
Art by Marko Djurdjevic.
Publication information
Publisher	Marvel Comics
Schedule	Monthly
Format	
List[show]
Genre	
Superhero
Publication date	
List[show]
No. of issues	
List[show]
Main character(s)	
List[show]
Creative team
Created by	Jeff Parker
Written by	
List[show]
Penciller(s)	
List[show]
Inker(s)	
List[show]
Colorist(s)	
List[show]
Collected editions
Tomorrow's Brightest	ISBN 0-7851-2427-6
X-Men: First Class is a comic book series published by Marvel Comics starring the original X-Men.[1][2][3][4][5]


Contents
1	Publication history
2	Creative teams
3	Publications
3.1	Collected editions
4	Film
5	References
6	External links
Publication history
The original series was an eight-issue limited series. It began in September 2006 and ended in April 2007. It was written by Jeff Parker and penciled by Roger Cruz. It was followed by a special issue in May 2007 and a monthly series that premiered in June 2007 with the same creative team.

Many of the series' stories are done in single issues, some are two-parters and multiple issue arcs. The original team of X-Men are wearing new costumes in the series. The series guest-stars many other characters, such as the Lizard, Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch, Man-Thing, Gorilla-Man, Doctor Strange, Invisible Woman, and Thor.

The series has spawned a few spin-offs, titles including the ongoing series Wolverine: First Class, and the miniseries Weapon X: First Class.

The ongoing series lasted sixteen issues and it was followed by Giant-Size X-Men: First Class special issue. Starting February 2009, a four-issue miniseries titled X-Men: First Class Finals encompasses volume 3. This ends with the team going on to the Krakoa island mission.

A new volume called Uncanny X-Men: First Class premiered in an August 2009 one-shot Uncanny X-Men: First Class Giant-Sized and concentrated on the team first introduced originally back in Giant-Sized X-Men #1.

Creative teams
X-Men: First Class (vol. 1)
Writer: Jeff Parker
Pencils: Roger Cruz
Inks: Victor Olazaba
Colored by: Val Staples
Lettered by: Nate Piekos
Cover by: Marko Djurdjevic
X-Men: First Class Special
Writer: Jeff Parker
Pencils: Kevin Nowlan, Paul Smith, Mike Allred, Nick Dragotta
Inks: Kevin Nowlan
Colored by: Kevin Nowlan
Lettered by: Nate Piekos
X-Men: First Class (vol. 2)
Writer: Jeff Parker
Pencils and Inks: Roger Cruz
Colored by: Val Staples
Lettered by: Nate Piekos
Cover by: Eric Nguyen
Publications
X-Men: First Class (vol. 1) (8-issue limited series, September 2006 - April 2007)
X-Men: First Class Special (one-shot, May 2007)
X-Men: First Class (vol. 2) #1-16 (ongoing series, June 2007 - November 2008)
Giant Size X-Men: First Class #1 (one-shot, November 2008)
X-Men: First Class Finals #1-4 (February - May 2009)
Giant Size Uncanny X-Men: First Class #1 (one-shot, August 2009)
Uncanny X-Men: First Class #1-8 (September 2009 - April 2010)
Wolverine: First Class #1-21 (ongoing series, May 2008 - January 2010)
Weapon X: First Class #1-3 (January - March 2009)
Collected editions
The stories are being collected into trade paperbacks:

Title	Material collected	Pages	ISBN
Tomorrow's Brightest	X-Men: First Class vol. 1 #1-8	184	ISBN 0-7851-2427-6
Mutant Mayhem	X-Men: First Class vol. 2 #1-5 and Special	152	ISBN 0-7851-2781-X
Band of Brothers	X-Men: First Class vol. 2 #6-10	192	ISBN 0-7851-2599-X
The Wonder Years	X-Men: First Class vol. 2 #11-16 and Giant-Size X-Men: First Class #1	168	ISBN 0-7851-3347-X
Finals	X-Men: First Class Finals #1-4 and Giant-Size X-Men vol. 1 #1	136	ISBN 0-7851-3348-8
Hated And Feared	Giant-Size Uncanny X-Men: First Class and Uncanny X-Men: First Class #1-4	136	ISBN 0-7851-4104-9
Knights Of Hykon	Uncanny X-Men: First Class #5-8	136	ISBN 0-7851-4237-1
The Rookie	Wolverine: First Class #1-4, plus a classic Wolverine reprint	120	ISBN 0-7851-3316-X
To Russia, With Love	Wolverine: First Class #5-8, and Uncanny X-Men #139-140	160	ISBN 0-7851-3317-8
Wolverine-By-Night	Wolverine: First Class #9-12	120	ISBN 0-7851-3534-0
Ninjas, Gods And Divas	Wolverine: First Class #13-16, and FCBD 2009	120	ISBN 0-7851-3535-9
Class Actions	Wolverine: First Class #17-21	120	ISBN 0-7851-3678-9
Film
Main article: X-Men: First Class
The 2011 film X-Men: First Class acts as a prequel to the X-Men film trilogy. Though it shares the same title as the comic series, the plots share almost no resemblance.

Producer Simon Kinberg read the comics and suggested studio 20th Century Fox to adapt it. However, Kinberg did not want to follow the comic too much, as he felt "it was not fresh enough in terms of storytelling", considering them too similar to Twilight and John Hughes movies, and also because the producers wanted an adaptation that would introduce new, hitherto unexplored X-Men characters.

References
 Marvel.com
 News on X-Men: First Class (vol. 2) on Marvel.com
 Details of X-Men: First Class collection on Marvel.com
 Josh Schwartz to Write X-Men: First Class Film
 X-POSITION: First Class interview with Fred Van Lente and Jeff Parker
External links
X-Men: First Class vol. 1 at the Grand Comics Database
X-Men: First Class vol. 1 at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
X-Men: First Class vol. 2 at the Grand Comics Database
X-Men: First Class vol. 2 at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
X-Men: First Class vol. 3 at the Grand Comics Database
X-Men: First Class vol. 3 at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
vte
X-Men comic books
Current titles	
Cable Excalibur Hellions Marauders New Mutants Wolverine X-Force X-Men
Upcoming titles	
Children of the Atom X-Factor
Past team titles	
A+X All-New X-Factor All-New X-Men Alpha Flight Amazing X-Men Astonishing X-Men Cable and X-Force Classic X-Men District X Extraordinary X-Men Generation X New Excalibur Fallen Angels New X-Men NYX Professor Xavier and the X-Men Spider-Man and the X-Men Uncanny X-Force Uncanny X-Men Weapon X Wolverine and the X-Men X-Men Blue X-Men Gold X-Men Red X-Men: First Class X-Men: Legacy X-Men: The Hidden Years X-Men Unlimited X-Statix X-Treme X-Men Young X-Men
Past solo titles	
Agent X All-New Wolverine Cable & Deadpool Cyclops Deadpool Domino Iceman Jean Grey Mr. & Mrs. X Nightcrawler Old Man Logan Rogue & Gambit Wolverine: Origins Wolverine: The Best There Is Wolverine: Weapon X X-Men Black X-23 (2010) X-23 (2018)
Past alternate
universe titles	
Exiles/New Exiles Mutant X Ultimate Comics: X-Men Ultimate X-Men X-Men 2099 X-Men '92 X-Men Forever X-Men: The End X-Men: The Manga X-Nation 2099
Limited series titles	
List of X-Men limited series and one-shots House of X / Powers of X Star Trek/X-Men The Uncanny X-Men and The New Teen Titans X-Men: Apocalypse vs. Dracula X-23: Target X
Storylines	
"Second Genesis" "The Dark Phoenix Saga" "Days of Future Past" "The New Mutants" "God Loves, Man Kills" "Mutant Massacre" "Fall of the Mutants" "Inferno" "Days of Future Present" "X-Tinction Agenda" "Muir Island Saga" "X-Cutioner's Song" "Fatal Attractions" "Bloodties" "Child's Play" "Phalanx Covenant" "Legion Quest" "Age of Apocalypse" "Onslaught" "Operation: Zero Tolerance" "The Hunt for Xavier" "The Magneto War" "The Twelve" "Ages of Apocalypse" "Eve of Destruction" "House of M" "Decimation" "Deadly Genesis" "Endangered Species" "Messiah Complex" "Divided We Stand" "Manifest Destiny" "X-Infernus" "Messiah War" "Utopia" "Nation X" "Necrosha" "Second Coming" "Curse of the Mutants" "Age of X" "Schism" "Regenesis" "X-Termination" "Avengers vs. X-Men" "Battle of the Atom" "Trial of Jean Grey" "Death of Wolverine" "Apocalypse Wars" "AXIS" "The Black Vortex" "Inhumans vs. X-Men" "Phoenix Resurrection" "Hunt for Wolverine" "Extermination" "Return of Wolverine" "Age of X-Man" "House of X and Powers of X"
New X-Men story arcs	
E Is for Extinction Imperial New Worlds Riot at Xavier's Murder at the Mansion Assault on Weapon Plus Planet X Here Comes Tomorrow
Relaunches	
Mutant Genesis Revolution Morrison Era ReLoad Decimation Regenesis Marvel NOW! All-New, All-Different Marvel ResurrXion Marvel Legacy Fresh Start Dawn of X
Other	
"Ultimate Spider-Man and X-Men"
Related	
Ultimate X-Men story arcs Uncanny X-Men #94
Category Categories Titles Storylines
Categories: Marvel Comics limited seriesX-Men titlesSuperhero comics2006 comics debuts2007 comics debuts2009 comics debutsDefunct American comics
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Русский
日本語
Edit links
This page was last edited on 25 April 2020, at 05:50 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Click here for more information.
X-Men: First Class
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For the comic series, see X-Men: First Class (comics).
X-Men: First Class
X-MenFirstClassMoviePoster.jpg
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Matthew Vaughn
Produced by	
Lauren Shuler Donner
Bryan Singer
Simon Kinberg
Gregory Goodman
Screenplay by	
Ashley Edward Miller
Zack Stentz
Jane Goldman
Matthew Vaughn
Story by	
Sheldon Turner
Bryan Singer
Based on	
X-Men
by Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
Starring	
James McAvoy
Michael Fassbender
Rose Byrne
January Jones
Oliver Platt
Kevin Bacon
Music by	Henry Jackman
Cinematography	John Mathieson
Edited by	
Lee Smith
Eddie Hamilton
Production
company
Marvel Entertainment
The Donners' Company
Bad Hat Harry Productions
Dune Entertainment
Ingenious Film Partners
Distributed by	20th Century Fox
Release date
May 25, 2011 (Ziegfeld Theatre)
June 1, 2011 (United Kingdom)
June 3, 2011 (United States)
Running time
132 minutes[1]
Country	
United States[2][3][4]
United Kingdom[3][4]
Language	English
Budget	$140–160 million[5][6]
Box office	$353.6 million[6]
X-Men: First Class (also marketed as X: First Class) is a 2011 superhero film based on the X-Men characters appearing in Marvel Comics. The fifth installment in the X-Men film series and a prequel to X-Men (2000), it was directed by Matthew Vaughn and produced by Bryan Singer, and stars James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Rose Byrne, January Jones, Oliver Platt, and Kevin Bacon. The film is set primarily in 1962 during the Cuban Missile Crisis, and focuses on the relationship between Professor Charles Xavier and Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto, and the origin of their groups—the X-Men and the Brotherhood of Mutants, respectively, as they deal with the Hellfire Club led by Sebastian Shaw, a mutant supremacist bent on enacting nuclear war.

Producer Lauren Shuler Donner first thought of a prequel based on the young X-Men during the production of X2; producer Simon Kinberg later suggested to 20th Century Fox an adaptation of the comic series X-Men: First Class, although the film does not follow the comic closely. Singer, who had directed both X-Men and X2, became involved with the project in 2009, but he could only produce and co-write First Class due to his work on other projects. Vaughn, who was previously attached to both X-Men: The Last Stand and Thor, became the director, and also wrote the final script with his writing partner Jane Goldman. First Class replaced a Magneto prequel film that had been in development, but had entered development hell; the Writers Guild of America arbitration gave a story credit to Magneto writer Sheldon Turner. Principal photography began in August 2010 and concluded in December, with additional filming completed in April 2011. Locations included Oxford, the Mojave Desert and Georgia, with soundstage work done in both Pinewood Studios and the 20th Century Fox stages in Los Angeles. The depiction of the 1960s drew inspiration from the James Bond films of the period.

First Class premiered on Ziegfeld Theatre on May 25, 2011, and was released in the United States on June 3, 2011. It was a box office success, becoming the seventh highest-grossing in the film series, and received positive reviews from critics and audiences, who praised its acting, screenplay, direction, action sequences, visual effects, and musical score. The film's success re-popularized the X-Men film franchise with various installments following, including a number of sequels focusing on younger iterations of the X-Men characters, with X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014), X-Men: Apocalypse (2016), and X-Men: Dark Phoenix (2019).


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
3.1	Development
3.2	Filming
3.3	Effects
4	Music
5	Release and reception
5.1	Critical response
5.2	Box office
5.3	Home media
6	Accolades
7	Sequels
8	Notes
9	References
10	External links
Plot
In 1944, in a Nazi death camp, Nazi scientist Klaus Schmidt witnesses young prisoner Erik Lehnsherr bending a metal gate with his mind when he is separated from his parents. In his office, Schmidt orders Lehnsherr to move a coin on his desk, and kills the boy's mother when Lehnsherr fails to do so. In grief and rage, Lehnsherr's magnetic power manifests, killing the two guards while they scream in pain and destroying the room. Meanwhile, in a mansion in Westchester County, New York, child telepath Charles Xavier meets young shapeshifter Raven, whose natural form is blue-skinned and scaly. Overjoyed to meet someone "different", like himself, he invites her to live with his family as his foster sister.

In 1962, Lehnsherr, now a Nazi hunter, is tracking down Schmidt for vengeance, while Xavier graduates from the University of Oxford. In Las Vegas, CIA officer Moira MacTaggert follows U.S. Army Colonel Hendry into the Hellfire Club, where she sees Schmidt—now known as Sebastian Shaw— with mutant telepath Emma Frost, teleporter Azazel, and cyclone-producing Riptide. Threatened by Shaw and teleported by Azazel to the Joint War Room, Hendry advocates deployment of nuclear missiles in Turkey. Shaw, an energy-absorbing mutant whose powers have de-aged him, later kills Hendry by releasing the energy he absorbed previously from an exploding grenade.

MacTaggert, seeking Xavier's advice on mutation, takes him and Raven to the CIA, where they convince Director McCone that mutants exist and Shaw is a threat. Another CIA officer sponsors the mutants and invites them to the secret "Division X" facility. MacTaggert and Xavier find Shaw as Lehnsherr is attacking him on his yacht, and Xavier rescues Lehnsherr from drowning, while Shaw escapes in a submarine. Xavier brings Lehnsherr to Division X, where they meet young scientist Hank McCoy, a mutant with prehensile feet, who believes Raven's DNA may provide a "cure" for their appearance. Xavier uses McCoy's mutant-locating device Cerebro to seek recruits against Shaw. Xavier and Lehnsherr recruit stripper Angel Salvadore, cabbie Armando Muñoz, Army prisoner Alex Summers, and conceited drifter Sean Cassidy.

When Frost meets with a Soviet general in the USSR, and uses her telepathic powers to pretend to have sex with him, Xavier and Lehnsherr capture Frost and discover that Shaw intends to start a nuclear war between the US and the USSR which would accelerate, trigger global mutations and therefore lead to extinction of the human race. Azazel, Riptide and Shaw attack Division X, killing everyone but the mutants, whom Shaw invites to join him. Salvadore accepts; and when Summers and Muñoz retaliate, Shaw kills Muñoz. In Moscow, Shaw compels the general to have the USSR install missiles in Cuba. Wearing a helmet that blocks telepathy, Shaw follows the Soviet fleet in a submarine to ensure the missiles break a US blockade.

Raven, thinking McCoy is attracted to her in her natural form, tells him not to use the cure. When she later attempts to seduce Lehnsherr by taking the forms of various women, Lehnsherr tells her she is beautiful as she is, in her natural mutant form which makes her contemplate naturism. McCoy uses the cure on himself but it backfires, giving him blue fur and leonine aspects. With McCoy piloting, the mutants and MacTaggert take a jet to the blockade line, where Xavier uses his telepathy to influence a Soviet sailor to destroy the ship carrying the missiles, and Lehnsherr uses his magnetic power to lift Shaw's submarine from the water and deposit it on land. During the ensuing battle, Lehnsherr seizes Shaw's helmet, allowing Xavier to immobilize Shaw. Lehnsherr tells Shaw he shares Shaw's exclusivist view of mutants but, to avenge his mother, kills Shaw—over Xavier's objections—by forcing the Nazi coin from his childhood through Shaw's brain, causing massive pain to Xavier in the process.

Fearing the mutants, both fleets fire missiles at them, which Lehnsherr turns back in mid-flight. MacTaggert tries to stop Lehnsherr by shooting him but he deflects the bullets, one of which hits Xavier in the spine. Lehnsherr rushes to help Xavier and, distracted, allows the missiles to fall harmlessly into the ocean. Parting with Xavier over their differing views on the relationship between mutants and humans, Lehnsherr leaves with Azazel, Riptide, Salvadore, and Mystique. Later, Xavier – now using a wheelchair – and his mutants are at the X-Mansion, where he intends to open a school. MacTaggert promises never to reveal his location and they kiss. As they kiss, Xavier uses his powers to erase her memories of having ever met him or the entire conflict to ensure both his and her safety. Elsewhere, Lehnsherr, now wearing Shaw's helmet and a uniform, frees Frost from confinement alongside Raven and the Hellfire Club, now dubbed the "Brotherhood", reintroducing himself as "Magneto".

Cast
Michael Fassbender and James McAvoy sit in front of the "X" logo for Xavier's school.
Actors Michael Fassbender and James McAvoy at a press junket
James McAvoy as Charles Xavier / Professor X:
The telepathic mutant leader and founder of the X-Men. He is a close friend of Erik Lehnsherr until their differing views of mutantkind's place in humanity create a schism between them. McAvoy was Vaughn's top choice for Xavier, and, after being cast, auditioned with every actor considered for Magneto to test the duo's chemistry.[7] McAvoy said he did not read comic books as a child, but added that he was a fan of the X-Men animated series from the age of 10. While he describes the older Charles Xavier as "a monk ... a selfless, egoless almost sexless force for the betterment of humanity and mortality", he says that the younger Xavier is a very different person: "It's quite fun because the complete opposite of that is an ego-fueled, sexed up self-serving dude. And not going too far with it, but he's definitely got an ego and he's definitely got a sex drive as well."[8] McAvoy admitted to feeling similarities between Xavier/Magneto and Martin Luther King Jr./Malcolm X, stating that the film was "sort of like meeting them at a point where they are still finding out who they are and you are still seeing some of the events that shaped them."[9] McAvoy avoided doing any callbacks to Patrick Stewart's performance as Xavier as Vaughn told him and Michael Fassbender to only take the allusion to Xavier and Magneto's old friendship in the other movies as inspiration.[10] Vaughn stated that since he considered that Professor X was "a bit of a pious, sanctimonious boring character, and he's got too much fucking power", the script would make young Xavier more interesting by "making him more of a rogue" who would become more responsible as his mission of finding more mutants went on.[7]
Laurence Belcher as young Charles Xavier[11]
Michael Fassbender as Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto:
A Nazi hunter and mutant capable of manipulating and generating electromagnetic fields. He becomes Xavier's friend and ally until their philosophical differences create a schism between them. Fassbender had auditioned for an earlier Matthew Vaughn project, and the director had remembered him and sent Fassbender the X-Men script. Though Fassbender knew little of the superhero team, he became interested in the part after reading the script and familiarizing himself with Magneto in the comic books. Fassbender, who considered Lehnsherr as a Machiavellian character who is neither good nor evil, watched Sir Ian McKellen's performances to get the flavor of Magneto, but ultimately chose to "paint a new canvas" with the character, "just going my own way and working with whatever is in the comic books and the script."[12] Vaughn said Lehnsherr "is straight up cool; he's Han Solo while Professor X is Obi-Wan Kenobi".[13][note 1]
Bill Milner plays young Erik Lehnsherr, although archived footage of Brett Morris, who previously played the same character at the same age, was reused for the beginning.[14]
Rose Byrne as Moira MacTaggert:
A CIA agent who befriends Xavier and Lehnsherr. Byrne said she was unfamiliar with both the comics and the film series, except for "what a juggernaut of a film it was". The actress was cast late into production,[15] which had already begun by the time she was picked for the role. MacTaggert was described by Byrne as "a woman in a man's world, she's very feisty and ambitious—you know, she's got a toughness about her which I liked".[16]
Jennifer Lawrence as Raven Darkhölme / Mystique:
A shape-shifting mutant who is Charles Xavier's childhood friend and adoptive sister who joins Erik's Brotherhood of Mutants and Hank's love interest. After the dramatic Winter's Bone, Lawrence sought First Class to do "something a little lighter".[17] Despite having not seen any of the X-Men films, the actress watched them and became a fan, which led her to accept the role as well, as did the prospect of working with Vaughn, McAvoy and Fassbender.[18] Vaughn said Lawrence was picked because "she could pull off the challenging dichotomy that Raven faces as she transforms into Mystique; that vulnerability that shields a powerful inner strength."[19] Lawrence had some reservations about her performance due to Mystique's previous portrayal by Rebecca Romijn, as she considered Romijn to be "the most gorgeous person in the world",[18] and felt their portrayals were very contrasting, feeling hers was "sweet and naive" while Romijn was "sultry and mean".[19] The actress went on a diet and had to work out for two hours daily to keep in shape,[20] and for Mystique's blue form, Lawrence had to undergo an eight-hour make-up process similar to that of Romijn on the other films.[13] The first day with make-up even caused blisters to appear on Lawrence's upper body.[19]
Morgan Lily as young Raven Darkhölme: with the actress wearing a slip-on bodysuit and facial appliances which only took one hour and a half to apply, as subjecting a child actor to the extensive make-up was impractical.[21]
Rebecca Romijn as older Raven Darkhölme: a brief uncredited cameo, which Vaughn added as an in-joke—the script has Raven "becom[ing] Brigitte Bardot or Marilyn Monroe, like an older sex icon of those times".[22]
January Jones as Emma Frost
An extremely strong mutant telepath who can also change her entire body into hard diamond form which grants her superhuman strength, stamina, psionic immunity, and durability, at the cost of using her telepathic abilities. She is a member of the Hellfire Club. Prior to Jones' casting, Alice Eve was the subject of what Variety called "widespread Internet reports" that Eve "was set to play Emma Frost, although no deal was in place."[14] Jones accepted the role to get something different from her job in the TV series Mad Men. While discovering that like the show First Class was set in the 1960s, the actress considered that: "[Frost]'s so, so far from Betty and from Mad Men, and it takes place in that time but it doesn't feel like a period movie." The actress described the revealing costumes of the character as "insane," saying, "She's got quite the bod, which is very intimidating". The actress stated that she did only a limited exercise routine to keep in shape, as "I'm a petite person, so I didn't want to go into a strict workout and eating regime."[23]
Nicholas Hoult as Hank McCoy / Beast:
A genius scientist who has mutant abilities similar to those of the great apes. He attempts to cure himself of what he believes to be physically debilitating aspects of his mutation only to be transformed into a frightening-looking blue-furred apeman with leonine attributes. Despite his new appearance, he is kind and caring at heart. Broadway actor Benjamin Walker was previously cast as Beast, but eventually turned down the role to star in the Broadway musical Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson.[24] Hoult was chosen for being "gentle with a capability of being fierce",[13] and admitted to being both an X-Men fan and enthusiastic on both returning to the action genre after 2010's Clash of the Titans and working with the film's cast.[25] The actor had to use makeup that took four hours to apply when Hank becomes the Beast, which include a mask, contact lenses, a furry muscle suit and fake teeth.[13] As Vaughn wanted Beast to look more feral than the version Kelsey Grammer played in X-Men: The Last Stand, the redesign went through various tests, which tried to make Beast not resemble any particular animal but still look like Hoult, as well as with a furry body,[26] which makeup artist Alec Gillis of Amalgamated Dynamics likened to "something akin to a wolf's pelt on his face, his arms—everywhere". The suits employed actual dyed fur from fox pelts.[21]
Oliver Platt as Man In Black Suit:
A CIA agent and head of Division X, a government agency working with the X-Men.[27] Vaughn had considered his friend Dexter Fletcher for the part, but the studio felt the cast had too many British actors,[7] and Fletcher himself declined, to direct Wild Bill.[28]
Jason Flemyng as Azazel:
A mutant who has the ability to teleport, and is also a member of the Hellfire Club. Flemyng, who had previously been considered for Beast in The Last Stand, said he did not want more make-up heavy roles after playing Calibos in Clash of the Titans, but made an exception for Azazel as he liked working with Vaughn. Due to the Cold War setting, Flemyng tried to imply that Azazel is Russian to partly explain his pleasure in killing CIA agents.[29] The actor spent eight weeks with fight training, particularly with swords, and had to undergo a four-hour make-up process, which like Mystique was designed by Spectral Motion—but did not include Azazel's tail, which was computer-generated.[21] Shuler Donner considered that the problems with the shade of red on Azazel's skin—"some looked like the Devil, some like a man wearing red paint"—was overcome by adding scars that made him more human, eyes brighter than Flemyng's own, and "a black mane of hair that seemed to tie everything in".[26]
Lucas Till as Alex Summers / Havok:
A mutant who has the ability to absorb energy and discharge it as blasts. The producers told Till his audition served for both Havok and Beast, and the actor replied that despite his lifelong dream of playing a superhero, "I know you'll kill me, but if I get Beast, I'm not in the movie. I'm not going through that makeup everyday [sic]."[30]
Edi Gathegi as Armando Muñoz / Darwin:
A mutant with the ability of "reactive evolution." Gathegi became interested in a role in the X-Men films after seeing X2, and had previously auditioned for Agent Zero in X-Men Origins: Wolverine. He read for Banshee while auditioning for First Class, and only learned he was playing Darwin a few days prior to the shoot. Gathegi worked out and entered an eating regime to get in shape, and also researched the comics about his character.[31] All of Darwin's transformations—getting gills, turning his skin into concrete—were done through computer graphics,[13] with a computer-generated version of Gathegi that could seamlessly blend in and out of the human form.[32]
Kevin Bacon as Sebastian Shaw:
(also known as Dr. Klaus Schmidt) A former mutant Nazi scientist and the leader of the Hellfire Club, a secret society bent on taking over the world. He has the power of absorbing and redirecting kinetic and radiated energy. Producer Lauren Shuler Donner said Bacon was considered for Shaw for being an actor who could convey a villain "with different shades, that's not always clear that he's the bad guy".[33] Vaughn added that Bacon "had that bravado that Shaw needed", while stating that the actor was his top choice along with Colin Firth.[7] Bacon accepted the role as he was a fan of Vaughn's Kick-Ass, and liked both the character of Shaw and the script, which he described as "a fresh look at the franchise, but also the comic book movies in general".[34] The actor considered that Shaw was a sociopath to whom "the morality of the world did not apply", with producer Simon Kinberg adding that Bacon portrayed him as "somebody, who in his mind, is the hero of the movie". Bacon also said that, "aside from the kind of evil side, I portrayed him as kind of a Hugh Hefner type".[33] Vaughn discarded Shaw's look from the comics as he felt he would "look like an Austin Powers villain".[10]
Caleb Landry Jones as Sean Cassidy / Banshee:
A mutant capable of emitting incredibly strong ultrasonic screams, sonic blasts, sonic bursts, and sonic waves used in various ways including as a means of flight. Jones auditioned without knowing what X-Men character he was up for,[35] saying he auditioned because it was a superhero that fit his biotype: "I've got red hair and freckles, I'm not gonna be Batman, Robin or Spider-Man".[33] The actor also stated that the script defined the character more than the comics, as Banshee went through various reinventions in print. Given Banshee gets involved with MacTaggert in the comics, Jones also tried to "look at her just a little bit differently, you know, when I can."[35] As Jones suffers from acrophobia, using the rig that was to depict Banshee's flight required much preparation time with the stunt team.[13]
Zoë Kravitz as Angel Salvadore:
A mutant with dragonfly wings which are tattooed on her body and who possesses acidic saliva. The make-up team took four hours to apply Angel's wing tattoo on Kravitz, and the visual effects team had to erase the tattoo in case the scene required Angel with the computer-generated wings.[32] To depict flight, Kravitz stood on elevated platforms and was dangled on wires,[13] at times from a helicopter to allow for varied camera angles.[32]
Matt Craven as CIA Director McCone:
A director of the CIA.
Álex González as Janos Quested / Riptide:
A silent mutant member of the Hellfire Club, with the ability to create powerful whirlwinds from his hands and body. First Class marks the first English-language film for González, who auditioned while taking English classes in London. He enjoyed playing a villain as most of his film roles in Spain were for "good guys", and compared Riptide's respectable and polite personality, which can suddenly be dropped to perform fierce attacks, to a hurricane; in a translation of a Portuguese-language interview, he is quoted as saying, "When I see a hurricane from far, it is calm. The only thing I can see is a kind of tube. But from inside, up close, it is really dangerous."[36]
Rade Šerbedžija as Russian General
A high-ranking Soviet military official during the early 1960s.
Glenn Morshower as Colonel Hendry
A US Army officer coerced by the Hellfire Club.
Other cast members include Annabelle Wallis as Amy, a young woman with heterochromia; Don Creech as CIA Agent Stryker, father of Major William Stryker (a character who appears in X2, X-Men Origins: Wolverine, X-Men: Days of Future Past, and X-Men: Apocalypse);[37] Michael Ironside; Ray Wise;[38] James Remar; Brendan Fehr; Demetri Goritsas; Ludger Pistor and Aleksander Krupa also portrayed small roles in this film. Hugh Jackman reprises his role as Logan / Wolverine in an uncredited cameo in a bar, dismissing an approach by Xavier and Lehnsherr to join them. Jackman said he accepted the offer to appear because "it sounded perfect to me", particularly for Wolverine being the only character with a swear word.[39] X-Men creator Stan Lee, who appeared in the first and third movie and regularly cameos in other Marvel-based movies, explained that he was unable to participate in First Class because "they shot it too far away".[40]

Production
Development
During the production of X2, producer Lauren Shuler Donner had discussed the idea of a film focusing on the young X-Men with the crew, which was met with approval; the concept was revived during the production of X-Men: The Last Stand.[41] One of The Last Stand's writers, Zak Penn, was hired to write and direct this spin-off,[42] but this idea later fell through.[43] Penn explained in 2007 that "the original idea was to have me do a young X-Men spin-off, a spin-off of the young X-Men characters. But someone came up with a pretty interesting idea ... it was this guy who worked with me named Mike Chamoy, he worked a lot with me on X3. He came up with how to do a young X-Men movie which is not what you'd expect."[43]

Around the same time, in December 2004, 20th Century Fox hired screenwriter Sheldon Turner to draft a spin-off X-Men film, and he chose to write Magneto, pitching it as "The Pianist meets X-Men."[44] According to Turner, the script he penned was set from 1939 to 1955,[45] following Magneto trying to survive in Auschwitz. He meets Xavier, a young soldier, during the liberation of the camp. He hunts down the Nazi war criminals who tortured him, and this lust for vengeance turns him and Xavier into enemies.[46] In April 2007, David S. Goyer was hired to direct. The film would take place mostly in flashbacks with actors in their twenties, with Ian McKellen's older Magneto as a framing device,[46] and some usage of the computer-generated facelift applied to him in the prologue of X-Men: The Last Stand,[47] McKellen reiterated his hope to open and close the film.[48] The Magneto film was planned to shoot in Australia for a 2009 release,[49][50] but it was delayed by the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike.[51]

As producer Simon Kinberg read the comic series X-Men: First Class, he suggested studio 20th Century Fox to adapt it. Kinberg, however, did not want to follow the comic too much, as he felt "it was not fresh enough in terms of storytelling", considering them too similar to Twilight and John Hughes movies, and also because the producers wanted an adaptation that would introduce new characters.[41] Both Kinberg and Shuler Donner said that they wanted characters with visuals and powers that had not been seen and that worked well as an ensemble, even if they did not work together in the comics.[33] Shuler Donner later said that the original idea was to green-light First Class depending on the success of X-Men Origins: Magneto.[52] That project was seeking approval to film in Washington, D.C.,[53] and by December 2008, Goyer said filming would begin if X-Men Origins: Wolverine was successful. The story was moved forward to 1962, and involves Xavier and Magneto battling a villain.[54]

In 2008, Josh Schwartz was hired to write the screenplay, while declining the possibility of directing X-Men: First Class.[55] Fox later approached Bryan Singer, director of X-Men and X2, in October 2009.[56] Schwartz later said that Singer dismissed his work as "he wanted to make a very different kind of movie",[57] with the director instead writing his own treatment which was then developed into a new script by Jamie Moss.[56]

In 2009, Ian McKellen confirmed that he would not be reprising his role as Magneto in the Origins movie citing his age,[58] and Shuler Donner stated that the movie might never be made,[59] stating it was "at the back of the queue" in the studio's priorities.[60] Both Donner and Bryan Singer have stated that Magneto would not be produced as the plot of X-Men: First Class "superseded" the story of the planned film.[61][62] Singer denied using Sheldon Turner's script for Magneto as inspiration to write his draft of First Class,[63] but the Writers Guild of America arbitration still credited Turner for the film's story, while Moss and Schwartz's collaborations ended up uncredited.[64][65] Singer set the film in a period where Xavier and Magneto were in their twenties, and seeing that it was during the 1960s, added the Cuban Missile Crisis as a backdrop, considering it would be interesting to "discuss this contemporary concept in a historical context". Shuler Donner suggested the Hellfire Club as the villains.[41]

In addition to Moss, Ashley Edward Miller and Zack Stentz were hired to rewrite the script. Miller compared it tonally to Singer's work on the first two X-Men films.[66] The pair centered the film on Xavier and Magneto's relationship, and wrote the other characters and storylines in terms of "how they fit in the tension between Erik and Charles".[41] Singer dropped out of the director's position in March 2010 due to his commitment to a Jack the Giant Killer adaptation. He formalized his duties from director to producer.[67]

The producers listed various possible directors, but at first did not consider Matthew Vaughn because he started working on The Last Stand before backing out. After seeing Vaughn's satirical superhero film Kick-Ass (2010), Kinberg decided to contact Vaughn to see if he would be interested in First Class.[41] When Fox offered Vaughn the "chance to reboot X-Men and put your stamp all over it", he first thought the studio was joking, but accepted after discovering that it was to be set in the 1960s.[68] The director stated that First Class would become the opportunity to combine many of his dream projects: "I got my cake and ate it, managed to do an X-Men movie, and a Bond thing, and a Frankenheimer political thriller at the same time".[7] Vaughn signed on as Singer's replacement in May 2010, and Fox subsequently announced a June 3, 2011 release date.[69] Vaughn also rewrote the script with his screenwriting partner Jane Goldman, adding new characters and changing existing character arcs and dynamics—for instance, the idea of a love triangle between Xavier, Magneto and Moira MacTaggert was cut.[41] The character of Sunspot was also cut, as the director felt that "we didn't have enough time or money" to make the character work. Vaughn and Goldman considered including mentions to the civil rights movement, but ultimately the director felt that "I had enough political subplot in this movie". Vaughn stated that his biggest concern was to both make Erik and Charles' friendship believable given the short timespan of the film, and on how the character of Magneto was built—"Shaw was the villain, but now you're seeing all those elements of Shaw going into Magneto."[7] An action scene that was to have been set in a dream sequence with revolving rooms was scrapped after the release of Inception (2010).[70]

Describing his thought process towards the material, Vaughn said he was motivated by "unfinished business" with Marvel, having been previously involved with the production of both X-Men: The Last Stand[68] and Thor.[71] Vaughn declared that he was more enthusiastic about First Class than The Last Stand due to not being constrained by the previous installments, and having the opportunity to "start fresh", while "nodding towards" the successful elements from those films.[71] Vaughn compared First Class to both Batman Begins (2005), which restarted a franchise with an unseen approach,[72] and the 2009 Star Trek film, which paid homage to the original source material while taking it in a new direction with a fresh, young cast.[73] Regarding continuity, Vaughn said his intention was "to make as good a film that could stand on its own two feet regardless of all the other films" and also that could "reboot and start a whole new X-Men franchise".[71] Goldman added the film was kind of an "alternate history" for the X-Men, saying that while rebooting, the writers did not want to go fully "against the canon of the X-Men trilogy", comparing to the various approaches the comic had in over fifty years of publication.[74]

The film also rescues a central concept in the comics, the fact that radiation is one of the causes of genetic mutation in the X-Men fictional universe, and incorporates it in the storyline, resurrecting the concept which went unused in the last years, as writers in the comics more recently have attributed the phenomenon of mutation mostly to evolution and natural selection.

Filming
A mansion surrounded by trees and hedges.
The Englefield House served as the X-Mansion.
Principal photography began on August 31, 2010, in Oxford, England, which included St Aldate's street and some of the University of Oxford's buildings, and lasted for two days.[75] Production then moved to Pinewood Studios in Iver,[76] and to Georgia in October, including Tybee Island, Thunderbolt, and Savannah,[77] after sites in Louisiana, North Carolina[78] and West Michigan were considered.[79] Jekyll Island was chosen over Tybee Island after a producer reviewed the locations on Google Earth and thought the water near Jekyll looked more blue.[78] Palm trees were planted into the island's sand so that it would look more like a tropical beach, but the cold weather caused many of the palm trees to become brown or die only days into the shoot, necessitating significant digital color correction from the visual effects team.[32] Additional location shooting took place in Russia.[80] A section of the plot is set in the Argentine coastal city of Villa Gesell, but was filmed in another province of the country with no beach but with mountains instead.[21][81] Washington, D.C., the Mojave Desert and Fox's soundstages in Los Angeles also served as locations.[21] The Englefield House in Berkshire served as the X-Mansion, and had its interior decoration adapted to resemble the way the mansion looked in the previous films. Both the submarine and the X-Jet were built on hydraulic sets so that they could be rotated for the vehicles' movements.[82]

Principal photography ended in December, although just half of the climax had actually been filmed because producers realized the originally planned one was not going to work.[83] Additional filming, primarily in California at Los Angeles and Long Beach soundstages,[84][85] continued into April 2011, leaving only three-to-four weeks for post-production before the film's scheduled premiere in June.[86] The tight schedule to meet the release date led Vaughn to declare that he had "never worked under such time pressure".[85] The film cost approximately $160 million to produce without tax breaks,[87] with the eventual cost around $140 million.[5]

A battleship fires its guns while surrounded by helicopters and a crane.
Filming of the naval battle scenes.
The 1960s setting of X-Men: First Class, technologically inspired by the James Bond films of that era, also added to the international feel of the characters.[80] Kinberg said the series was a major influence for the way they "did a cool job representing the period, in a way it still felt muscular and action-oriented", and Vaughn added that Magneto was his attempt to recreate Sean Connery's Bond in both style and the "badass, charming, ruthless and sweet" personality.[82] The director said his goal was to "feel like a '60s Bond film, but with a little bit of reality it could be grounded in. I wanted there to be just a hint of this world of the mutants coming through. A mutant in this world having powers needed to be the equivalent of you or I sneezing, as normal as possible, at least until the humans start seeing it for the first time."[10] At the same time, Vaughn tried to do the "bloody hard balancing" of modern and antique to recreate the 1960s in way it was "not so alien to the kids that it looked like a period piece."[82] The director also tried to depict the era still in a realistic way, particularly "that '60s misogynist vibe" with women in skimpy suits, and McTaggert's reliability as a CIA agent being questioned.[7] There is also a nod to the 1950s and 60s in the scenes set in "Oxford University", starting with the "heterochromia scene". These are set in a pub called "the Eagle", next to the famous "Bridge of Sighs" in Oxford, but there is no such pub. This seems to be a reference to the Eagle pub in Cambridge, where Crick and Watson infamously announced their solution to the structure of DNA (in 1953), very relevant to the themes of the film.

Vaughn said he shot the film in a way which resembled the productions of the 1960s, with "very traditional framing, and camera movement when it needs to move, not just throwing it around and whizz-bang",[7] and using the anamorphic format "to create a widescreen experience, which is emblematic of '60s movies, such as the James Bond films".[21] The director had to hire five cinematographers - with sole credit being given to John Mathieson, who came halfway through the shoot and did "forty-five percent, fifty-five percent" of the film—and four assistant directors to successfully convey the look he wanted for the film.[7][10] Visual effects supervisor Matt Johnson added that for the lighting of the digital interior of Cerebro, "keeping with the '60s vibe, we put in some old school elements such as lens flare and chromatic aberration and edge fringing."[21] The aesthetics of the decade were also invoked by designers Simon Clowes and Kyle Cooper of Prologue Films, who were responsible for the end credits and tried to do something that "could be done with traditional optical". The credits animation depicts DNA strands through simple geometric shapes, drawing inspiration from both Saul Bass and Maurice Binder's work in the Bond films.[88]

The origin story made the X-Men costumes resemble the ones in the original comics, while still being functional, with the yellow parts resembling Kevlar and the blue looking like ballistic nylon, and resembling 1962 apparel in both the fabrics and the "Space Age fashion". The costumes tried to convey the character personalities—for instance, Xavier wore loose clothes, and Emma Frost's costumes were white and shimmery. Magneto's costume at the film's ending also closely resembled the original version from the comics, and three versions of his helmet were made, two to fit Fassbender's head and one for Bacon's.[89]

Effects
First Class employed 1,150 visual effects shots,[90] which was done by six companies:[21] Rhythm and Hues was responsible for Emma Frost, Mystique and Angel, as well as set extensions; Cinesite handled Azazel, the visuals for Cerebro and environment effects; Luma Pictures did Banshee, Havok and Darwin; Moving Picture Company did Beast, Riptide, and the scene where Shaw's yacht is destroyed and he escapes in a submarine; Digital Domain created Sebastian Shaw's powers, and Weta Digital was responsible for the climactic battle in Cuba.[32] The overall coordination was provided by visual effects designer John Dykstra, who said the biggest difficulty was the tight schedule: "It was slightly less than a year and I've never done anything like that before (Spider-Man was frequently two years)."[90] British company 4dMax employed special 3D scanners to digitize data of the sets and actors which would be used by the effects companies.[21] This allowed for computer-generated sets such as the mirrored nuclear reactor where Magneto battles Shaw[90]—for which the effects team used the mirror maze fight in Enter the Dragon as a reference—and the domed walls of Cerebro. Digital models of Washington and Moscow were also created based on photographs of the actual cities,[32] with the Russian one in particular having vehicles and military hardware based on videos of a 1962 Red Square, and a digital army doing an actual Soviet-style march. With the exception of scenes featuring the actors on ships (shot on a small bridge set) and the X-Jet (done on a set replicating the front two-thirds of the aircraft, which was mounted atop a roller wheel so it could be spun) the naval battle was entirely digital, featuring a simulated ocean and high resolution 3D models of the X-Jet, Shaw's submarine and 16 warships. The designs were mostly based on real vehicles, with the jet being a modified SR-71 Blackbird, the submarine a combination of various models from the 1940s and 1950s, and replicas of the actual US and USSR fleets in the 1960s—though a few were not in service in 1962. A particular Soviet cruiser was a larger version of the Kresta I and II, leading Weta to dub it the Kresta III.[21] Practical effects were still used whenever possible, such as having on location most of the objects young Erik throws after his mother's death, actors and stuntmen dangled from wires, and real explosions and light effects as reference for Havok's beams.[13]

While in the comics Shaw's absorption power was depicted by having him grow up to ten times his original size, First Class instead does what company Digital Domain called a "kinetic echo", where a digital Kevin Bacon would be rippled, deformed and at times multiplied in repeated "iterations" that appear in a short period, to "see [Shaw] displace and deform in a kinetic and organic way".[13] According to Dykstra, the biggest problem with Frost's diamond body was depicting it "without looking like she was made of Jell-O or the polygon model of a human being".[90] The morphed Frost, which the visual effects tried to make look more like a faceted crystal than glass,[90] was rotomated into Jones in the live-action plates, while still retaining the actress' eyes and lips.[21] As the character kept on going in and out of her diamond form, a motion capture tracking suit could not be employed, so instead the effects team used both gray and chrome balls and a jumpsuit covered in mirrors—which also served as a lighting reference.[13][32] For Angel's digital wings, the animators studied slow-motion footage of dragonflies to create the wing pattern in a realistic way,[21] and the designers added iridescence to "make the wings prettier".[91] The visual of Banshee's screams was done through a digital ring-like structure based on renderings of sound waves such as Schlieren photography.[21][32] The visual for Havok's blasts employed similar rings,[32] concentrated in beams or rings of light which were then match moved into Till's mimed throwing.[21] For Banshee's flight, the visual effects team used digital doubles only for distant shots, with closer ones employing Jones shot in a special flight rig.[21] Azazel's teleporting was made to resemble the "inky smoky effects" used with Nightcrawler, who appeared in X2 and is Azazel's son in the comics.[21] However, while Nightcrawler only left a smoke trail, the visual effects team had Azazel accompanied by digital fire and smoke "because he was more closely aligned with the devil". The fire was also used "as a mask to hide or reveal the body", according to effects supervisor Matt Johnson.[32] Since the visible part of whirlwinds are the dust and dirt sucked up by them, the ones Riptide produces were made to resemble "a tornado of gas, made out of nothingness" by visual effects supervisor Nicolas Aithadi. The final product was mostly a practical effect made with dry ice, which was augmented by computer-generated imagery.[21] The visual effects team portrayed Mystique's abilities slightly differently due to this being a younger version, with "the scales being slightly longer and the transformation being slightly showier than when she became the more mature Rebecca."[90] For Beast, computer graphics depicted his simian-like feet, the transformation sequence, and a few facial replacements for when Beast opened his mouth wider than the mask on Hoult's face allowed.[21]

Music
Henry Jackman, who had worked with Vaughn in Kick-Ass, composed the score. Following the James Bond influences on First Class, Jackman drew inspiration from John Barry's work in the said series, which he described as "extremely posh pop music".[92] Jackman started his work with a "Superman-style theme", which is only featured in the final parts of the film as Vaughn thought it was too "successful and triumphant" for a disjointed and up-and-coming team. Therefore, Vaughn reworked a 'stretched' half-time version of the theme into the remainder of the film. The themes for Magneto and Shaw have similarities to reflect their "perverted father-son" relationship, with even a seamless transition during the scene where Shaw is killed to represent Lensherr's full transformation into Magneto.[93] The track "Rage and Serenity" is reused in Vaughn's 2017 film Kingsman: The Golden Circle.

In a roundtable interview with multiple news outlets, Vaughn responded to a question about choosing "Love Love" by the British band Take That for the end-credits theme, explaining, "I bumped into lead singer Gary Barlow in Los Angeles, and we were just talking, and I said, 'Do you want to come and see a rough cut of it?' And they came, and they wrote the song, and I listened to it, and I said, 'I think it'll be a hit', and if we can do a video which gets girls more interested ... we might get them to come and watch it. So it's pure commerce, to be blunt, and I want women to see this film."[7] An instrumental of the song "Run (I'm a Natural Disaster)" by Gnarls Barkley is used in the 'mutant recruitment' scene.

X-Men: First Class (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)
Film score by Henry Jackman
Released	July 12, 2011
Recorded	2011
Genre	Film score
Length	60:14
Label	Sony Masterworks
Producer	Henry Jackman
Henry Jackman chronology
Winnie the Pooh
(2011)	X-Men: First Class (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)
(2011)	Puss in Boots
(2011)
X-Men soundtrack chronology
X-Men Origins: Wolverine
(2009)	X-Men: First Class
(2011)	The Wolverine
(2013)
All music is composed by Henry Jackman.

Track listing
No.	Title	Length
1.	"First Class"	3:20
2.	"Pain and Anger"	2:58
3.	"Would You Date Me?"	1:44
4.	"Not That Sort of Bank"	3:27
5.	"Frankenstein's Monster"	3:03
6.	"What Am I Thinking"	2:10
7.	"Cerebro"	2:23
8.	"Mobilise for Russia"	1:18
9.	"Rise Up to Rule"	5:56
10.	"Cold War"	3:20
11.	"X-Training"	4:27
12.	"Rage and Serenity"	2:06
13.	"To Beast or Not to Beast"	4:47
14.	"True Colors"	1:51
15.	"Let Battle Commence"	4:45
16.	"Sub Lift"	2:19
17.	"Coup d'état"	2:15
18.	"Mutant and Proud"	3:28
19.	"X-Men"	2:59
20.	"Magneto"	1:53
Total length:	60:14
Release and reception
The premiere for X-Men: First Class took place at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City, on May 25, 2011.[94] The promotional campaign aimed for non-traditional partners, with Fox signing deals with Farmers Insurance Group, BlackBerry PlayBook and the U.S. Army.[95] Wrigley Australia issued an X-Men-themed edition of their 5 chewing gum.[96]

Critical response
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes the film holds an approval rating of 86% based on 291 reviews, with an average rating of 7.37/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "With a strong script, stylish direction, and powerful performances from its well-rounded cast, X-Men: First Class is a welcome return to form for the franchise."[97] On Metacritic, the film received a score of 65 out of 100, based on reviews from 38 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[98]

Among the major trade publications, Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter described the film as "audacious, confident and fueled by youthful energy", and said that "director Vaughn impressively maintains a strong focus dedicated to clarity and dramatic power ... and orchestrates the mayhem with a laudable coherence, a task made easier by a charging, churning score by Henry Jackman ...".[99] Justin Chang of Variety said the film "feels swift, sleek and remarkably coherent", and that "the visual effects designed by John Dykstra are smoothly and imaginatively integrated ..."[100] Frank Lovece of Film Journal International lauded "a wickedly smart script with a multilayered theme that ... never loses sight of its ultimate story, and makes each emotional motivation interlock, often shockingly playing for keeps with its characters. This is not a kids' movie."[101]

In consumer publications, Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly praised "the kind of youthful, Brit-knockabout pop energy director Matthew Vaughn absorbed from his previous collaborations as producer of director Guy Ritchie's bloke-y larks", and found McAvoy and Fassbender "a casting triumph. These two have, yes, real star magnetism, both individually and together: They're both cool and intense, suave and unaffected, playful and dead serious about their grand comic-book work."[102] Peter Howell of the Toronto Star called it "a blockbuster with brains" and said Vaughn "brings similar freshness to this comic creation as he did to Kick-Ass, and manages to do so while hewing to the saga's serious dramatic intent."[103]

Box office
X-Men: First Class went on general release on June 3, 2011. In North America, the film opened on approximately 6,900 screens at 3,641 locations, debuting atop the weekend box office with earnings of $55.1 million across the three days,[104][105] including $3.4 million in its Friday midnight launch.[106] This opening was much lower than the opening weekends of X-Men: The Last Stand ($102.7 million), X2 ($85.5 million), and X-Men Origins: Wolverine ($85.0 million), but slightly higher than the original film ($54.5 million).[105] Executives at 20th Century Fox stated they had achieved their goal by opening with about the same numbers as the first X-Men film and that it was an excellent start to a new chapter of the franchise.[104]

First Class also opened 8,900 locations in 74 overseas markets, which brought in $61 million during the weekend—standing third in the overseas ranking behind Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides and The Hangover Part II. The film opened atop the box office in twenty countries, with the biggest grosses being in the United Kingdom ($9 million, including previews), France ($7.1 million), Mexico ($5 million), South Korea ($5.4 million) and Australia ($5.1 million).[107] In its second weekend X-Men: First Class dropped 56.2 percent, the second-smallest second-weekend drop in the franchise behind X2: X-Men United (53.2 percent), and came in with $24.1 million, in second place to Super 8.[108] Overseas, it rose to number two behind Kung Fu Panda 2, with $42.2 million.[109] The film grossed $146,408,305 in the United States and Canada and $207,215,819 in foreign markets, bringing its worldwide total to $353,624,124.[6]

Home media
X-Men: First Class was released on DVD and Blu-ray September 9, 2011 in the US, and in the UK on October 31, 2011.[110][111] The home release topped the sales charts in the United States[112] with approximately 385,000 DVDs.[113] Blu-ray accounted for 60 percent of first-week disc sales, amounting to about 575,000 discs.[114] In the UK it sold 150,000 units.[115] The film was later released on 4K UHD Blu-ray on October 4, 2016.[116]

Accolades

Year of ceremony	Award	Category	Recipients	Result
2011	National Board of Review Awards[117]	Spotlight Award	Michael Fassbender (Also for Shame, A Dangerous Method, and Jane Eyre)	Won
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards[118]	Best Actor	Michael Fassbender (Also for Shame, A Dangerous Method, and Jane Eyre)	Won
2011 Teen Choice Awards[119]	Choice Movie: Breakout Actress	Jennifer Lawrence	Nominated
Zoë Kravitz	Nominated
Choice Movie: Villain	Kevin Bacon	Nominated
Choice Movie: Chemistry	Lucas Till, Jennifer Lawrence, Nicholas Hoult, Zoë Kravitz, Caleb Landry Jones and Edi Gathegi	Nominated
Choice Movie: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Film	Nominated
2011 Scream Awards[120]	The Ultimate Scream	Film	Nominated
Best Scream-Play	Film	Nominated
Best Fantasy Movie	Film	Won
Best Director	Matthew Vaughn	Nominated
Best Fantasy Actor	James McAvoy	Nominated
Best Fantasy Actor	Michael Fassbender	Nominated
Best Fantasy Actress	Jennifer Lawrence	Nominated
Best Villain	Kevin Bacon	Nominated
Best Superhero	James McAvoy	Nominated
Breakout Performance: Female	Zoë Kravitz	Nominated
Breakout Performance: Male	Michael Fassbender	Nominated
Best Cameo	Hugh Jackman	Won
Best Ensemble	Film	Nominated
Best Comic Book Movie	Film	Nominated
2012	2012 People's Choice Awards[121]	Favorite Action Movie	Film	Nominated
Favorite Ensemble Movie Cast		Nominated
Favorite Movie Superhero	Jennifer Lawrence	Nominated
Favorite Movie Superhero	James McAvoy	Nominated
Saturn Awards[122]	Best Science Fiction Film	X-Men: First Class	Nominated
Best Make-Up	Dave Elsey, Fran Needham, and Conor O'Sullivan	Won
Sequels
Main articles: X-Men: Days of Future Past, X-Men: Apocalypse, and Dark Phoenix (film)
The film's success led to the continuation of the film series. X-Men: Days of Future Past, which acts as a sequel to both First Class and The Last Stand, was released on May 23, 2014. A direct sequel, X-Men: Apocalypse, was released on May 27, 2016. A third and final sequel, Dark Phoenix, was released on June 7, 2019.

Notes
 The onscreen credits spell the character's name as "Lensherr". However, previous X-Men films, the film's official website and the Marvel Comics web page for the character spell the name "Lehnsherr".
References
 Bentley, David (May 23, 2011). "X-Men: First Class gets a UK rating and official running time". Coventry Telegraph. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2011.
 "X-Men: First Class". American Film Institute. Retrieved May 14, 2014.
 "LUMIERE : Film: X-Men: First Class". Lumiere. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 "X-Men First Class (2011)". British Film Institute. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
 McClintock, Pamela (June 2, 2011). "Box Office Preview: 'X-Men: First Class' Expected to Bump 'Hangover II' From Top Spot". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved June 10, 2011.
 "X-Men: First Class (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved June 4, 2012.
 Leader, Michael (May 25, 2011). "Matthew Vaughn interview: X-Men: First Class, Thor, Hollywood, James Bond, Take That and more". UK: Den of Geek (Dennis Publishing). Archived from the original on July 1, 2012. Retrieved June 10, 2012.
 Tilly, Chris (March 30, 2011). "X-Men: First Class: James McAvoy Interview". IGN. Retrieved May 13, 2011.
 Tilly, Chris (March 30, 2011). "X-Men: First Class: James McAvoy Interview page 2". IGN. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 McWeeny, Drew (May 24, 2011). "Interview: Director Matthew Vaughn on making 'X-Men First Class' feel fresh". Hitfix.com. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved May 14, 2012.
 BrentJS (September 7, 2010). "Laurence Belcher Joins X-Men: First Class as Young Charles Xavier". ReelzChannel. Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2010.
 Tilly, Chris. "X-Men: First Class – Michael Fassbender Interview". IGN. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved May 13, 2011.
 Extraordinary Abilities. X-Men: First Class DVD: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (August 17, 2010). "January Jones joins 'X-Men'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011. Retrieved August 18, 2010.
 "Exclusive Interview with Rose Byrne!". InStyle UK. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved November 3, 2011.
 Yamato, Jen (May 13, 2011). "Rose Byrne on Bridesmaids, X-Men: First Class Sequels, and the Films That Made Her Career". Movieline (PMC). Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2011.
 Tilly, Chris (May 11, 2011). "X-Men: First Class - Mystique Interview". IGN. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
 Ditzian, Eric (May 20, 2011). "'X-Men' Star Jennifer Lawrence Was Intimidated By 'Gorgeous' Rebecca Romijn". MTV. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
 Dehn, Georgia (May 23, 2011). "X-Men: Jennifer Lawrence interview". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
 "Jennifer Lawrence on Being Painted Naked Daily for 'X-Men: First Class'". The Hollywood Reporter. January 19, 2011. Archived from the original on July 3, 2011. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
 Duncan, Jody (July 2011). "First Class Effects". Cinefex (126): 96–120. Retrieved June 5, 2012. (subscription required)
 Lussier, Germain (June 6, 2011). "Film Interview Part 2: Matthew Vaughn Talks Major 'X-Men: First Class' Spoiler". /Film. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
 Keegan, Rebecca (January 5, 2011). "'X-Men: First Class': January Jones copes with sexed-up, 'insane' costumes". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 6, 2011. Retrieved October 29, 2011.
 "Benjamin Walker to Star in Broadway Transfer of Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson". Broadway.com. July 15, 2010. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2010.
 "Nicholas Hoult: From 'Boy' to 'Man'". Variety. October 22, 2010. Retrieved February 15, 2014.
 "Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men First Class" [Transformation] (Featurette). X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 Fleming, Mike (August 16, 2010). "Oliver Platt Joins 'X-Men: First Class'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 16, 2010.
 Williams, Andrew (March 29, 2012). "Dexter Fletcher: I turned down a part in X-Men: First Class in order to direct Wild Bill". Metro. Retrieved February 15, 2014.
 Bentley, David (May 23, 2011). "Jason Flemyng on X-Men: First Class and nearly playing Beast in X-Men: The Last Stand". Coventry Telegraph. Coventry, UK: The Geek Files. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved October 29, 2011.
 Eggertsen, Chris (September 7, 2011). "Lucas Till talks playing Havok in "X-Men: First Class"". HitFix. Retrieved August 16, 2010.
 Morales, Wilson (May 27, 2011). "X-Men: First Class / Exclusive Edi Gathegi". Blackfilm.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved December 12, 2011.
 Failes, Ian (June 16, 2011). "Making Mutants for X-Men: First Class". fxguide.com. Archived from the original on November 29, 2011. Retrieved October 29, 2011.
 "Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men First Class" [Band of Brothers] (Featurette). X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 Knolle, Sharon (January 19, 2011). "Kevin Bacon on 'X-Men: First Class' and Whether He'll See the 'Footloose' Remake". MovieFone (AOL). Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
 Tilly, Chris (May 13, 2011). "X-Men: First Class - Banshee Interview". IGN. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
 "Ator de novo X-Men fala sobre vilão do filme" (in Portuguese). R7.com. June 1, 2011. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
 Marshall, Rick (June 3, 2011). "'X-Men: First Class' Easter Eggs: Five Things To Look For This Weekend!". MTV. Retrieved June 26, 2011.
 Goldman, Eric (November 30, 2010). "Wise Casting for X-Men: First Class". IGN. Retrieved December 1, 2010.
 Ryan, Mike (September 26, 2011). "Hugh Jackman on How His 'X-Men: First Class' Cameo Almost Didn't Happen". Moviefone. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
 Morrison, Patt (June 11, 2011). "Patt Morrison Asks: Comics genius Stan Lee". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 15, 2014.
 "Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men First Class" [Second Genesis] (Featurette). X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 Douglas, Edward (April 11, 2006). "Zak Penn on His Potential X-Men Spin-off". SuperheroHype.com. Retrieved December 18, 2010.
 Davis, Erik (May 1, 2007). "Zak Penn Talks X-Men Spin-Off, Incredible Hulk Casting". "Cinematical" (column) Moviefone (AOL). Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved February 9, 2008.
 Michael Fleming; Claude Brodesser (December 12, 2004). "Fox pages Turner to pen Magneto spinoff pic". Variety. Retrieved April 7, 2007.
 Michelle Kung (December 20, 2004). "Checking in with ... 'Magneto'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 7, 2007.
 Michael Fleming (April 26, 2007). "Fox, Marvel move on 'garrett'". Variety. Retrieved April 26, 2007.
 Stax (May 2, 2006). "McKellen Talks Magneto Movie". IGN. News Corporation. Retrieved April 6, 2007.
 Hassan, Genevieve (July 11, 2008). "McKellen keen for X-Men spin-off". BBC News Online. Retrieved July 11, 2008.
 Shawn Adler (May 15, 2007). "'X-Men' Spin-Off 'Magneto' To Reveal Anti-Hero Origin Story". MTV. Retrieved May 15, 2007.
 "More superhero movies head for Australia". NineMSN. July 24, 2007. Archived from the original on June 15, 2007. Retrieved August 4, 2007.
 Jennifer Vineyard (October 2, 2008). "Conceptual Artist Gives Glimpse Of 'Magneto' Origins". MTV Splash Page. Retrieved October 4, 2008.
 Spelling, Ian (April 22, 2009). "Magneto prequel still possible, depending on Wolverine". Sci Fi Wire / blastr. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved July 10, 2009.
 Jeffrey Ressner (June 4, 2008). "Klieg Lights, Big City". The Politico. Retrieved June 9, 2008.
 Steve Weintraub (December 11, 2008). "David Goyer reveals Magneto and Invisible Man Info". Collider. Retrieved December 15, 2008.
 Siegel, Tatiana and Marc Graser (November 18, 2008). "Fox, Josh Schwartz mutate 'X-Men'". Variety. Retrieved November 19, 2008.
 Fleming, Michael (December 17, 2009). "Bryan Singer to direct 'X-Men: First Class'". Variety. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Marshall, Rick (March 2, 2010). "Former 'X-Men: First Class' Writer Josh Schwartz Explains His Exit". MTV. Retrieved January 31, 2012.
 "Ian McKellen won't make X-Men return". Lifestyle from Yahoo. October 15, 2009. Retrieved October 11, 2009.
 "'X-Men Origins: Magneto' Producer Says Film Might Never Be Made". Lifestyle from Yahoo. October 16, 2009. Retrieved October 16, 2009.
 De Semlyen, Nick (October 16, 2009). "The Future the X-Men Franchise: Magneto". Empire. Retrieved October 23, 2010.
 Kit, Borys (December 21, 2009). "Heat Vision Q&A: Bryan Singer on 'X-Men: First Class,' 'Avatar' and more". Heat Vision. Retrieved April 26, 2010.
 Topel, Fred (August 23, 2010). "Lauren Shuler Donner on X-Men: First Class". CraveOnline. Retrieved September 2, 2010.
 Kit, Borys (April 29, 2011). "Bryan Singer: Why I Challenged 'X-Men: First Class' Writing Credits (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 6, 2012.
 Fernandez, Jay A.; Kit, Borys (April 27, 2011). "Complex 'X-Men: First Class' Screenplay Credit Dispute Resolved (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 6, 2012.
 Kit, Boris (April 29, 2011). "'X-Men: First Class' Writing Credits Appeal Denied". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 1, 2011. Retrieved May 11, 2011.
 Pirrello, Phil (May 6, 2010). "Inside X-Men: First Class". IGN. Retrieved December 18, 2010.
 Fleming, Mike (March 26, 2010). "Bryan Singer Producing 'X-Men: First Class'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved July 9, 2010.
 Douglas, Edward (May 27, 2011). "Exclusive Interview with X-Men: First Class Director Matthew Vaughn". Superhero Hype. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 5, 2010). "'X-Men' prequel to open June 04, 2011". Variety. Retrieved December 10, 2010.
 Boucher, Geoff (September 2, 2010). "'Inception' wake-up call – 'X-Men: First Class' director jettisons similar dream-time scenes". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 2, 2010.
 Lussier, Germain (May 25, 2011). "/Film Interview: 'X-Men: First Class' Director Matthew Vaughn". /Film. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
 Tilly, Chris (March 9, 2011). "X-Men: First Class Set Visit". IGN. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
 White, Cindy (August 2, 2010). "X-Men Following Star Trek's Lead". IGN. Retrieved August 3, 2010.
 O'Hara, Helen. "X-Men: First Class Interviews". Empire. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
 Hearn, Dan (October 1, 2010). "X-Men stars film prequel in city". The Oxford Student. Retrieved October 7, 2010.
 Dawtrey, Adam (November 27, 2010). "Snaring the big Hollywood pictures". Variety. Retrieved December 10, 2010.
 Conn, Lesley (September 9, 2010). "X-Men may be landing in Savannah". Savannah Morning News. Retrieved December 11, 2010.
 Conn, Lesley (October 20, 2010). "X-Men pick Jekyll Island over Tybee Island". Savannah Morning News. Retrieved December 11, 2010.
 "X-Men: First Class Scouting Locations in Michigan". SuperheroHype.com. June 7, 2010. Retrieved September 10, 2010.
 Knowles, Harry (August 20, 2010). "So Bryan Singer just called regarding Matthew Vaughn's X-Men: First Class ... I'm quite excited now". Ain't It Cool News. Retrieved December 18, 2010.
 Scholz, Pablo (May 28, 2011). "¿Villa Gesell?". Clarín (in Spanish). Buenos Aires. Retrieved June 5, 2012.: "A alguien ... se le ocurrió que el villano que interpreta Kevin Bacon en la Segunda Guerra Mundial, se refugiaba en los '60 en la Argentina. 'Villa Gesell', dicen, y en el plano siguiente se lee que están en 'Villa Gesell'. Pero se ve un lago con montañas de fondo. Y la música tiene ritmo español. Y el cantinero dice, 'cabrón'. ¿O será como el París, Texas, de Wenders? Muchachos, paremos la mano. Haber entrado en Google Maps ..." Translation: "Somebody thought that the villain played by Kevin Bacon during WWII takes refuge at 1960s Argentina. 'Villa Gesell', they say, and on the next screen it is read that they are in 'Villa Gesell'. But a lake with mountains in the background can be seen. And the music has a Spanish rhythm. And the barman says, 'cabrón'. Or is it like [Wim] Wenders' Paris, Texas? Hold on a little, people. If you just checked with Google maps ..."
 "Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men First Class" [New Frontier: A Dose of Style] (Featurette). X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 Borys Kit (June 10, 2019). ""We Were Wrong": Behind Fox's 'Dark Phoenix' Debacle". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 10, 2019.
 McNary, Dave (February 23, 2011). "Rain can't dampen production in L.A." Variety. Retrieved February 15, 2014.
 Boucher, Geoff (January 19, 2011). "'X-Men:First Class': Three exclusive photos and a report from the stressed-out set". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 6, 2012.
 Giardina, Carolyn (October 2, 2011). "Fox Exec at VES Panel: We Thought James Franco's Character Should Die in 'Apes'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 6, 2012.
 Zeitchik, Steven (June 4, 2011). "With 'X-Men: First Class' Fox tries a new mutation". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Retro Cool. X-Men: First Class DVD: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. 2011.
 "Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men First Class" [Suiting Up] (Featurette). X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 Desowitz, Bill (June 11, 2011). "Going Deeper into X-Men's Origins". Animation World Network. p. 2. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved October 29, 2011.
 "Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men First Class" [Pulling Off the Impossible] (Featurette). X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 "Children of the Atom: Filming X-Men: First Class" [Sound and Fury] (Featurette). X-Men: First Class Blu-Ray: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.
 Schweiger, Daniel (June 6, 2011). "Audio: On The Score With Henry Jackman". Film Music Magazine. Retrieved December 22, 2011.
 Clark, Noelene (May 26, 2011). "'X-Men: First Class': NYC premiere in photos and video". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 22, 2011.
 Hampp, Andrew (June 3, 2011). "How, and Why, Farmers Insurance Got a Seat in 'X-Men' Classroom". Advertising Age. Retrieved December 22, 2011.
 "Discover your mutant power with 5X gum" (Press release). Wrigley Australia. May 9, 2011.
 "X-Men: First Class (2011)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved December 22, 2019.
 "X-Men: First Class". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved December 7, 2014.
 McCarthy, Tod (May 30, 2011). "X-Men: First Class: Movie Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Nielsen Company. Archived from the original on June 1, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Chang, Justin (May 29, 2011). "Review: X-Men: First Class". Variety. Retrieved May 31, 2011.
 Lovece, Frank (June 2, 2011). "Film Review: X-Men: First Class". Film Journal International. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Schwarzbaum, Lisa (June 15, 2011). "X-Men: First Class Review". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 4, 2019.
 Howell, Peter (June 1, 2011). "X-Men: First Class: Brainy blockbuster". Toronto Star. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Germain, David (June 5, 2011). "'X-Men' mutants weaken with prequel debut". msnbc.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 8, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Gray, Brandon (June 6, 2011). "Weekend Report: 'First Class' Ranks Last Among 'X-Men'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 8, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 McClintock, Pamela (June 3, 2011). "Box Office Report: 'X-Men: First Class' Does Good Midnight Business". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 4, 2012.
 Segers, Frank (June 5, 2011). "'X-Men: First Class' Draws $61 Million at the Foreign Box Office". The Hollywood Reporter. Nielsen Company. Archived from the original on June 8, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Gray, Brandon (June 13, 2011). "Weekend Report: 'Super 8' Checks In at Top Spot". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 Segers, Frank (June 12, 2011). "'Kung Fu Panda 2' Commands $56.5 Million Internationally". The Hollywood Reporter. Neilson Company. Retrieved June 5, 2012.
 McCutcheon, David (July 7, 2011). "X-Men: First Class Announced for DVD/Blu-ray". IGN. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
 Bentley, David (August 22, 2011). "UK date and details announced for X-Men: First Class on DVD and Blu-ray". Coventry Telegraph. Coventry, UK. Archived from the original on March 30, 2012. Retrieved May 6, 2012.
 Arnold, Thomas K. (September 14, 2011). "'X-Men: First Class' Leads Wave of Summer Blockbusters to DVD". The Hollywood Reporter.
 "US DVD Sales Chart for Week Ending Sep 11, 2011". The-Numbers. Retrieved June 6, 2012.
 "Top 20 Sellers for the Week Ended 09/11/11". Home Media Magazine. Questex Media Group. Archived from the original on February 7, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2012.
 "X-Men: First Class Flies the Top of the Charts". Official Charts Company. November 4, 2011.
 X-Men: First Class 4K Blu-ray, retrieved January 31, 2018
 "2011 NBR Awards Announced". National Board of Review (December 1, 2011). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
 "37th Annual Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards" Archived July 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Los Angeles Film Critics Association. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
 Ng, Philiana (July 19, 2011). "Teen Choice Awards 2011: 'Pretty Little Liars,' Rebecca Black Added to List of Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved July 27, 2011.
 "SCREAM 2011". Spike TV. Retrieved September 7, 2011.
 "Nominations Announced for the 'People's Choice Awards 2012'" (Press release). People's Choice Awards. November 8, 2011. Retrieved May 6, 2012.
 "Nominations for the 38th Annual Saturn Awards". Saturn Award. Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films. February 29, 2012. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved February 29, 2012.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: X-Men: First Class
Official website
	Film portal
flag	United States portal
icon	Speculative fiction portal
X-Men: First Class on IMDb
X-Men: First Class at AllMovie
vte
X-Men in other media
vte
Live-action theatrical films based on Marvel Comics
vte
Matthew Vaughn
Categories: 2011 filmsEnglish-language films2010s adventure films2011 science fiction films2010s science fiction action films2010s superhero films2010s teen films20th Century Fox filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican alternate history filmsAmerican filmsAmerican science fiction action filmsAmerican science fiction adventure filmsAmerican sequel filmsBad Hat Harry Productions filmsBritish action adventure filmsBritish alternative history filmsBritish filmsBritish science fiction action filmsBritish sequel filmsCold War submarine filmsFilms about altered memoriesFilms about the Central Intelligence AgencyFilms about the Cuban Missile CrisisBritish films about revengeAmerican films about revengeFilms about Nazi huntersFilms about shapeshiftingFilms directed by Matthew VaughnFilms produced by Bryan SingerFilms produced by Lauren Shuler DonnerFilms produced by Simon KinbergFilms scored by Henry JackmanFilms set in 1944Films set in 1962Films set in ArgentinaFilms set in CubaFilms set in the Las Vegas ValleyFilms set in MiamiFilms set in MoscowFilms set in OxfordFilms set in PolandFilms set in the Soviet UnionFilms set in SwitzerlandFilms set in VirginiaFilms set in Washington, D.C.Films set in Westchester County, New YorkFilms shot at Pinewood StudiosFilms shot in ArgentinaFilms shot in Georgia (U.S. state)Films shot in LondonFilms shot in Los AngelesFilms shot in OxfordshireFilms shot in RussiaFilms shot in VirginiaFilms shot in Washington, D.C.Holocaust filmsFilms with screenplays by Ashley Edward Miller and Zack StentzFilms with screenplays by Bryan SingerFilms with screenplays by Jane GoldmanFilms with screenplays by Matthew VaughnTeen superhero filmsWorld War II filmsX-Men (film series)
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
中文
Français
Español
Bahasa Indonesia
العربية
Português
Русский
فارسی
Bahasa Melayu
32 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 July 2020, at 22:33 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Thor: Ragnarok
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Thor 3" redirects here. For the satellite of the same name, see Thor (satellite) § Thor 3.
Thor: Ragnarok
Thor Ragnarok poster.jpg
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Taika Waititi
Produced by	Kevin Feige
Written by	
Eric Pearson
Craig Kyle
Christopher L. Yost
Based on	
Thor
by Stan Lee
Larry Lieber
Jack Kirby
Starring	
Chris Hemsworth
Tom Hiddleston
Cate Blanchett
Idris Elba
Jeff Goldblum
Tessa Thompson
Karl Urban
Mark Ruffalo
Anthony Hopkins
Music by	Mark Mothersbaugh
Cinematography	Javier Aguirresarobe
Edited by	
Joel Negron
Zene Baker
Production
company
Marvel Studios
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release date
October 10, 2017 (El Capitan Theatre)
November 3, 2017 (United States)
Running time
130 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	$180 million[2]
Box office	$854 million[2]
Thor: Ragnarok is a 2017 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Thor, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. It is the sequel to Thor (2011) and Thor: The Dark World (2013), and the 17th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film is directed by Taika Waititi from a screenplay by Eric Pearson and the writing team of Craig Kyle and Christopher Yost, and stars Chris Hemsworth as Thor alongside Tom Hiddleston, Cate Blanchett, Idris Elba, Jeff Goldblum, Tessa Thompson, Karl Urban, Mark Ruffalo, and Anthony Hopkins. In Thor: Ragnarok, Thor must escape the alien planet Sakaar in time to save Asgard from Hela and the impending Ragnarök.

A third Thor film was confirmed in January 2014, with Kyle and Yost beginning work on the screenplay. The involvement of Hemsworth and Hiddleston was announced that October. Waititi joined the film as director a year later, after Thor: The Dark World director Alan Taylor chose not to return. Ruffalo joined the cast reprising the role of Hulk from previous MCU films, which allowed elements of the 2006 comic storyline "Planet Hulk" to be adapted for Ragnarok. The rest of the cast, including Blanchett as Hela, was confirmed in May 2016, with Pearson's involvement revealed at the start of filming that July. Principal photography took place in Brisbane and Sydney, Australia, with the film also having exclusive use of Village Roadshow Studios in Oxenford, concluding in October 2016.

Thor: Ragnarok premiered in Los Angeles on October 10, 2017, and was released in the United States on November 3, 2017, as part of Phase Three of the MCU. The film received praise for its acting and Waititi's direction, as well as the action sequences, humor and musical score, with many critics considering it to be the best installment of the Thor films. It grossed $854 million, becoming the highest-grossing film of the trilogy and the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2017. A sequel, Thor: Love and Thunder, is scheduled for release on February 11, 2022.


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
3.1	Development
3.2	Pre-production
3.3	Filming
3.4	Post-production
4	Music
5	Marketing
6	Release
6.1	Theatrical
6.2	Home media
7	Reception
7.1	Box office
7.2	Critical response
7.3	Accolades
8	Sequel
9	Notes
10	References
11	External links
Plot
Two years after the battle of Sokovia,[N 1] Thor is imprisoned by the fire demon Surtur, who reveals that Thor's father Odin is no longer on Asgard. He explains that the realm will soon be destroyed during the prophesied Ragnarök, once Surtur unites his crown with the Eternal Flame that burns in Odin's vault. Thor frees himself, defeats Surtur and takes his crown, believing he has prevented Ragnarök.

Thor returns to Asgard to find Heimdall gone and his estranged brother Loki posing as Odin. After exposing Loki, Thor forces him to help find their father, and with directions from Stephen Strange at the Sanctum Sanctorum in New York City, they locate Odin in Norway. Odin explains that he is dying, Ragnarök is imminent despite Thor's efforts to prevent it, and his passing will free his firstborn child, Hela, from a prison she was sealed in long ago. Hela was the leader of Asgard's armies, conquering the Nine Realms with Odin, but Odin imprisoned her and wrote her out of history after fearing that she had become too ambitious and powerful. Odin dies as Thor and Loki look on, and Hela appears, destroying Thor's hammer Mjolnir. She pursues the two as they attempt to flee through the Bifröst Bridge, forcing them out into space. Arriving in Asgard, she defeats its army and kills the Warriors Three. She then resurrects the ancient dead who once fought with her, including her giant wolf Fenris, and appoints the Asgardian Skurge as her executioner. Hela plans to use the Bifröst to expand Asgard's empire, but Heimdall sneaks in, takes the sword that controls the Bridge and begins hiding other Asgardians.

Thor crash-lands on Sakaar, a garbage planet surrounded by wormholes. A slave trader designated Scrapper 142 subdues him with an obedience disk and sells him as a gladiator to Sakaar's ruler, the Grandmaster, with whom Loki has already ingratiated himself. Thor recognizes 142 as a Valkyrie, one of a legendary force of female warriors who were killed fighting Hela eons ago. Thor is forced to compete in the Grandmaster's Contest of Champions, facing his old friend Hulk. Summoning lightning, Thor gets the upper hand, but the Grandmaster sabotages the fight to ensure Hulk's victory. Still enslaved after the fight, Thor attempts to convince Hulk and 142 to help him save Asgard, but neither is willing. He soon manages to escape the palace and finds the Quinjet that brought Hulk to Sakaar. Hulk follows Thor to the Quinjet, where a recording of Natasha Romanoff causes him to transform back into Bruce Banner for the first time since Sokovia.

The Grandmaster orders 142 and Loki to find Thor and Hulk, but the pair come to blows and Loki forces her to relive the deaths of her Valkyrie companions at the hands of Hela. Deciding to help Thor, she takes Loki captive. Unwilling to be left behind, Loki provides the group with the means to steal one of the Grandmaster's ships. They then liberate the other gladiators who, incited by two aliens named Korg and Miek, stage a revolution. Loki again attempts to betray his brother, but Thor anticipates this and leaves him behind, where Korg, Miek, and the gladiators soon find him. Thor, Banner, and 142 escape through a wormhole to Asgard, where Hela's forces are attacking Heimdall and the remaining Asgardians in pursuit of the sword that controls the Bifröst. Banner transforms into Hulk again, defeating Fenris, while Thor and 142 fight Hela and her warriors. Loki and the gladiators arrive to rescue the citizens, and a repentant Skurge sacrifices himself to enable their escape. Thor, facing Hela, loses his right eye and then has a vision of Odin that helps him realize only Ragnarök can stop her. He sends Loki to retrieve Surtur's crown and place it in the Eternal Flame. Surtur is reborn and destroys Asgard, killing Hela and himself, as the refugees flee.

Aboard the Grandmaster's spaceship, Thor, now king, reconciles with Loki and decides to take his people to Earth. In a mid-credits scene, they are intercepted by a large spacecraft.[N 2] In a post-credits scene, the overthrown Grandmaster is confronted by his former subjects.

Cast

Kevin Feige, Taika Waititi and the cast of Thor: Ragnarok at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con
Chris Hemsworth as Thor: 
The crown prince of Asgard, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name, who has become a "lone gunslinger" searching for the Infinity Stones.[3][5] Hemsworth had become "a bit bored" with the character after portraying Thor four times previously, and wanted to take some risks and experiment: the character has shorter hair in the film, wears a different outfit, his hammer Mjolnir is destroyed,[6] and he loses an eye. Director Taika Waititi added that "stripping" the character down like this allowed him to become a refugee at the end of the film.[7] Waititi also wanted to use more of Hemsworth's comedic talents showcased in films like Vacation (2015) and Ghostbusters (2016),[8] and cited Kurt Russell's portrayal of Jack Burton from Big Trouble in Little China (1986) as an influence on the character.[9]
Tom Hiddleston as Loki: 
Thor's adoptive brother and nemesis, based on the deity of the same name.[10][11] Hiddleston was interested in how Loki's attitude has changed, saying, "he is always a trickster. It is trying to find new ways for him to be mischievous".[12] As the ruler of Asgard since the end of Thor: The Dark World (2013), Hiddleston notes that "Loki has devoted most of his efforts to narcissistic self-glorification. Not so much on good governance."[13] He also added that "the idea that Thor might be indifferent to Loki is troubling for him... it's an interesting development."[14]
Cate Blanchett as Hela: 
Thor's older sister and the goddess of death, based on the deity Hel,[11][15][16] who is inadvertently released from prison following Odin's death.[17] Screenwriter Eric Pearson included the idea of Hela being Thor's sister in one of his drafts at the encouragement of executive producer Brad Winderbaum. The decision to make Hela related to Thor, as opposed to only to Loki as in the comics and Norse mythology, came from needing more impact with Hela and Thor's final confrontation. By making the change, Pearson felt Hela became "the thing that [represents] what it is to rule Asgard, [Thor's] family, what he's been told, what he hasn't been told."[18] Blanchett found it difficult to portray the character in a motion capture suit rather than costume, feeling Hela's headdress is "such a huge part of" the power of the character that she would have liked to wear it on set.[19] Hela's design was taken from the comic Thor: God of Thunder by Jason Aaron, while the character Gorr from that comic, who has the ability "to manifest an infinite number of weapons", inspired a similar ability for Hela.[20] Blanchett worked with stuntwoman Zoë Bell and Hemsworth's personal trainer Luke Zocchi, and studied capoeira for the role.[6][17]
Idris Elba as Heimdall: 
The all-seeing, all-hearing Asgardian and former sentry of the Bifröst Bridge, based on the deity of the same name, who has gone into self-imposed exile during Loki's reign.[11][21][22] After Hela invades Asgard, he helps to hide its vulnerable citizens. Describing Heimdall's character arc in the film, Winderbaum says, "he's gone from this elder statesmen, the gatekeeper to Asgard, to this badass warrior-wizard character who lives in the hills and kicks a lot of ass throughout the entire film."[22]
Jeff Goldblum as Grandmaster: 
One of the Elders of the Universe[13][23] who rules the planet Sakaar[8] and enjoys manipulating lesser life-forms.[11][24] Goldblum described the character as "a hedonist, a pleasure-seeker, an enjoyer of life and tastes and smells". He also said that Waititi encouraged improvisation in order for Goldblum to "make [the character his] own".[25] Waititi explained that Grandmaster does not have blue skin in the film as the character does in the comics, because Goldblum had already played a blue-colored character in Earth Girls Are Easy (1988), and because Waititi did not want to detract from Goldblum's personality by concealing his appearance.[26] Grandmaster is the brother of Benicio del Toro's Collector from Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), and producer Kevin Feige expressed interest in seeing the two together in a future film.[27]
Tessa Thompson as Scrapper 142 / Valkyrie: 
A tough, hard-drinking Asgardian slave trader,[8] based on the mythological being Brynhildr,[28] who was once a legendary Valkyrie warrior and now works for the Grandmaster under the designation "Scrapper 142".[22] Thompson said the various versions of the character from the comics "left us a lot of leeway" in creating the film version.[20] Waititi "wanted to make sure we weren't making a female character that was boring and pretty",[29] and Feige said Marvel wanted to pair Thor with a love interest more his equal than Jane Foster.[30] Co-screenwriters Craig Kyle and Christopher Yost's original draft of the film had more of a romantic relationship between Thor and Valkyrie. When Pearson started working on the film, he moved away from that storyline, instead focusing more on "the mutual respect" between the characters and Valkyrie "dealing with her PTSD. She's someone who's drowning her sorrows in the bottle, and I just thought that was such a cool thing that you don't often see".[18] Thompson stated that the character is bisexual, which she based on the character's comic book relationship with Annabelle Riggs, and convinced Waititi to shoot a glimpse of a woman walking out of Valkyrie's bedroom, which was later cut from the film, as Waititi thought that it distracted from the scene's exposition.[31] Thompson was inspired by pictures of Linda Hamilton as Sarah Connor in Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991) while training for the role,[29] and worked with dialect coach Andrew Jack to create an Asgardian-sounding accent that was different enough to sound like she had been away from there for a long time.[32] Thompson will appear in future MCU films.[11][33]
Karl Urban as Skurge: 
An Asgardian warrior[11][24] who guards the Bifröst Bridge in Heimdall's absence and chooses to join Hela to survive.[19][21] Urban shaved his head for the role, and worked out to "get into the zone and feel" the part even though his body is hidden under a costume.[34] Urban said Skurge "makes a deal with the devil" and becomes Hela's "henchman. He does the dirty jobs. And that sort of is something he has to—it plays on his conscience."[21]
Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner / Hulk: 
A genius scientist who transforms into a monster when enraged or agitated after being exposed to gamma radiation. In the two years since Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015), he has become a successful and popular gladiator on Sakaar[8][35] and has suppressed the Banner side during those years. He is forming the vocabulary "of a toddler",[13] with the level of Hulk's speech being "a big conversation" between Waititi and Marvel since it was taking into account future appearances for the character:[36] Ragnarok begins an arc for the character that continues in Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and Avengers: Endgame (2019).[37] Ruffalo felt Hulk had "a swagger" in the film, and was "much more of a character than the green rage machine" seen in the Avengers films.[8] Waititi provided additional motion capture for the Hulk after Ruffalo had completed his scenes.[38]
Anthony Hopkins as Odin: 
The king of Asgard, father of Thor and Hela, and adoptive father of Loki, based on the deity of the same name.[11] The character is in exile on Earth, and was originally intended to be a "crazy-looking" hobo on the streets of New York City, but Waititi ultimately felt that this was tragic rather than funny given the character's death during the sequence. The sequence was changed to take place in Norway, to "honor" the character's past and be more authentic to his role as a king of Asgard.[39] Waititi was surprised by the improvisational ability of Hopkins after he was told "to be funny and to really destroy what's come before [with the role] and recreate it."[38]
Additionally, Tadanobu Asano, Ray Stevenson, and Zachary Levi reprise their roles as Hogun, Volstagg, and Fandral, respectively, members of the Warriors Three.[22][40] Feige called their appearances "noble ends" that served to establish the threat of Hela and the danger she poses to the main characters.[41] Benedict Cumberbatch reprises his role as Dr. Stephen Strange from the film Doctor Strange (2016).[42] Rachel House, who has appeared in several of Waititi's films, plays Topaz, the Grandmaster's bodyguard,[19][43] while Waititi portrays Korg, a Kronan gladiator who befriends Thor. Waititi provided a motion-capture performance for the character, who is made of rocks, and wanted to do something different by having the character be soft-spoken,[44][45] ultimately basing Korg's voice on that of Polynesian bouncers.[46] Waititi also provided the motion-capture performance for the fire demon Surtur, based on the mythological being Surtr, with Clancy Brown voicing the character.[47] Thor and Hulk co-creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance as a man on Sakaar who cuts Thor's hair.[48] There are also several cameos in a sequence where Asgardian actors perform a play based on the events of The Dark World: Sam Neill, with whom Waititi previously worked on Hunt for the Wilderpeople (2016), plays the Odin actor;[49][50] Luke Hemsworth, brother of Chris, plays the Thor actor;[50] and Matt Damon plays the Loki actor.[50] Scarlett Johansson appears as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow through archival footage from Avengers: Age of Ultron.[51]

Production
Development
While promoting the release of Thor: The Dark World in October 2013, Chris Hemsworth expressed willingness to portraying Thor for as long as "people wanted more", adding that he was contracted for another Thor film and two more Avengers films.[52] Producer Kevin Feige stated that the next Thor would build from elements at the end of The Dark World.[53] In January 2014, Marvel announced that Craig Kyle and Christopher Yost would write the screenplay for a third film, with Feige again producing;[54] the story was being outlined that July.[55] At the end of October 2014, Feige announced that the film would be titled Thor: Ragnarok, with a scheduled release date of July 28, 2017. Hemsworth and Tom Hiddleston were set to return as Thor and Loki, respectively.[3][10] Hemsworth earned $15 million for the film.[56] Feige added that the film would be "very important" in Phase Three of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU),[3] and also confirmed that, in the context of the film, the word Ragnarok means "the end of all things".[57] He felt that "people will [not] read into that title alone what the movie's going to be."[58]

In February 2015, Marvel pushed back the release date to November 3, 2017.[59] That April, Feige was expecting a draft for the film soon,[60] and a month later he stated that a director, additional screenwriter, and further casting announcements would be revealed "towards the end of the summer",[61] with filming set for June 2016.[62] The Dark World director Alan Taylor explained that he would not be returning, as "the Marvel experience was particularly wrenching because I was sort of given absolute freedom while we were shooting, and then in [post-production] it turned into a different movie. So, that is something I hope never to repeat and don't wish upon anybody else."[63] During the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International, Jaimie Alexander said that she would reprise her role as Sif in "a very pivotal part" of the film.[64][65]

I think the overall sense that I'm trying to give to the audience and what I want the audience to leave the cinema carrying with them is a sense of joy really... Sometimes I would stop and think, I'm doing a movie that's got Thor and Doctor Strange and The Incredible Hulk and Loki and every character is so strange and different... Civil War it's just humans, humans with human problems. Ours is creatures and beings and all these sorts of really different characters.
—Taika Waititi, director of Thor: Ragnarok[66]
By October 2015, Taika Waititi had entered negotiations to direct Thor: Ragnarok. Other directors under consideration included Ruben Fleischer, Rob Letterman, and Rawson Marshall Thurber.[67] Marvel presented the prospective directors with "the ten different ideas that we had for the movie", asking them all to come back with a clearer picture of what the film should be.[68] Waititi created "a sizzle reel for the tone, and some joke stuff" using clips from other films,[68][69] including Big Trouble in Little China.[70] Despite being a discouraged practice within the company, Marvel considered Waititi's reel to be "amazing",[68] particularly its use of Led Zeppelin's "Immigrant Song" for the score,[71] which Feige felt "defined what Taika was going to do with this". The song was later used in the film itself, and for marketing it.[71] On why he decided to pursue directing the film, after stating in 2012 that he had no interest in "big features, where the art of the project was sacrificed for profit", Waititi said he felt "like a guest in Marvel's universe but with the creative freedom to do what I want".[72] Waititi was confirmed as director of the film by multiple news outlets later in October.[73][74][75]

In the same month, Mark Ruffalo was also finalizing a deal to reprise his role as Bruce Banner / Hulk from previous MCU films,[35] which was confirmed shortly after.[76] Hulk was last seen at the end of Avengers: Age of Ultron traveling in a Quinjet, which was originally planned to be shown flying near Saturn. Feige explained that this was changed to an Earth-based location to leave Hulk's fate ambiguous and dispel rumors that a film based on "Planet Hulk" was in development, since Marvel Studios had no plans to adapt the storyline at the time.[77] According to executive producer Brad Winderbaum, the idea to include Hulk in Ragnarok came early on in development, when the production team looked at the "Planet Hulk" storyline and felt it was a "no brainer" to integrate Hulk into the Thor franchise, exploring "the idea of a planet where there's gladiatorial games as a Thor predicament. [That storyline] was a really cool idea to us."[78] Feige further explained that initial discussions had focused on doing "something totally different with Thor", and that centered on continuing the relationship with Loki and ideas for Hela, Valkyrie, Balder, and Beta Ray Bill, "but we were like, 'We need something big.'" This turned to discussing Thor going to space, and jokingly calling it "Planet Thor", which led to including Hulk in the film and revealing that he ultimately went to space at the end of Age of Ultron.[77]

Also in October, Australia's Minister for Foreign Affairs Julie Bishop announced that filming would take place in the country,[79] exclusively throughout the state of Queensland, including at Village Roadshow Studios in Oxenford, Gold Coast. According to Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, the production was to spend over $100 million in Queensland and employ 750 Queenslanders.[80] Hemsworth had asked Marvel to produce the film in his home country of Australia.[81] At the end of November 2015, Stellan Skarsgård, who portrayed Erik Selvig in the previous Thor films, said that he was contracted to appear should Marvel want to include him, but he was uncertain at the time if they did.[82] He later confirmed that he would not appear in Thor: Ragnarok.[83] The next month, Stephany Folsom was hired to work on the script, and Cate Blanchett entered final negotiations to join the cast.[15][84]

Pre-production

Waititi at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con
In January 2016, with the film beginning pre-production,[80][85] Ruffalo described it as a "road movie" and indicated that additional filming would take place in Sydney.[86] Waititi stated that he was working on the script "a little bit", mainly adding humor to the screenplay,[87] with Eric Pearson joining the project to rewrite the screenplay. Pearson felt joining presented many challenges, as "there were so many puzzle pieces already there," such as having Blanchett as Hela,[88] who was confirmed in the role a month later,[89] and including Hulk, Valkyrie, and Skurge, that he was asked to assemble. Pearson was told not to be restrained by anything from the previous films, and Waititi asked him to make the film fun and have Thor "be the coolest character."[88] Alexander said in early March that she was no longer sure if she would appear in the film, due to scheduling conflicts with her television series Blindspot.[90] She later indicated that this may not be the case,[24][91] but ultimately was unable to appear in the film due to the conflict.[92][93] Sif does appear as a character in the play based on the events of The Dark World, portrayed by Charlotte Nicdao.[94]

In April, Tessa Thompson was cast as Valkyrie,[11][33] with Natalie Portman not returning from the previous films as love interest Jane Foster.[95][96] Marvel never asked the screenwriters to include the Earth-based characters from the previous films,[97] and Feige said that Foster and Thor have broken up between films.[30] In May, Marvel confirmed Blanchett and Thompson for the film, announced the casting of Jeff Goldblum as Grandmaster and Karl Urban as Skurge, and revealed that Idris Elba and Anthony Hopkins would reprise their respective roles of Heimdall and Odin from the previous films.[11] In early June, Palaszczuk and Marvel Studios executive David Grant announced that filming would begin on July 4, 2016,[98] with Weta Workshop creating props for the film.[34] Before the sets for Marvel's Doctor Strange were demolished, Waititi wrote and filmed a scene for Ragnarok where Thor meets Benedict Cumberbatch's Stephen Strange. Marvel and Doctor Strange director Scott Derrickson felt the scene was "kind of perfect" to show Strange joining the wider MCU, so the scene also appears during the credits of Doctor Strange.[42][99][100]

Feige noted that Thor: Ragnarok would primarily take place in the "cosmos" rather than on Earth, a departure from the previous Thor films.[58][101] He expanded by saying, "Tonally and geographically there are a lot of different planets outside of the nine realms that we visit" in the film.[95] Waititi consulted with theoretical physicist Clifford Johnson on space travel. Johnson viewed early drafts of the script, and gave Waititi physics ideas that could "wink at some of the classic old [Thor] stuff"; Johnson previously consulted on the second season of the MCU television series Agent Carter.[102] Astronomer-physicist Adam Frank was also a consultant on the film, advising on wormholes and interstellar travel.[103] Comic artist and Thor co-creator Jack Kirby was one of Waititi's major visual inspirations for the film.[104] Winderbaum also called Walt Simonson's "Ragnarok" story arc an inspiration for "really fun elements ... both stylistically and narratively", as well as Thor: God of Thunder by Jason Aaron, which was the inspiration for Hela's design and abilities.[20] Waititi said the planet Sakaar, which is featured in the "Planet Hulk" storyline, was "the biggest shift for the film and these characters",[104] with Winderbaum describing it as "the toilet of the universe", surrounded by "wormholes that have been spitting things out into this place for eons".[78] Also featured is Muspelheim, one of the Nine Realms, ruled by Surtur. Production designer Dan Hennah described it as a Dyson sphere, with the realm drawing power out of a dying star to energize its inhabitants.[105] Hennah hoped to give Asgard "more of a humanity" than in previous films, by adding smaller building perspectives to help the realm seem more practical and utilitarian. For Saakar's gladiator arena, Hennah looked at Roman gladiators, but differentiated from previous similar ideas by going "all alien with it". The arena is surrounded by "standing up bleachers".[106]

Waititi said that the film would reinvent the franchise, as "a lot of what we're doing with the film is, in a way, kind of dismantling and destroying the old idea and rebuilding it in a new way that's fresh. Everyone's got a slightly new take on their characters, so in that way, it feels like [this is] the first Thor (2011)."[8] He added that he had seen the other films and respected them, but wanted to focus on making a "standalone film because this could be the only time I do this. I just want to make it [my] version of a Marvel film in the best way possible."[9] This is something Hemsworth had hoped for, looking to have a lighter tone in Ragnarok compared to the previous Thor films, especially the second one, similar to Guardians of the Galaxy. He said, "I feel we had less of the sort of the naivety or fun or humor that the first [Thor] might have had. I wish we had more of that in the second [movie] ... We've done regal. We've done Shakespeare, and we've shown that. I think now it's time to go, 'Ok, cool. Let's try something different.'"[107] Hemsworth continued that in order to prevent the character or film from becoming "predictable", there was "definitely a goal to do something unexpected...I think we want to get back to more of a sense of adventure and fun".[108]

The events of Ragnarok are set four years after the events of Thor: The Dark World, two years after the events of Avengers: Age of Ultron,[3][109] and around the same time as the events of Captain America: Civil War (2016) and Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017), with Winderbaum noting that "things happen on top of each other now in Phase Three."[5] The events of Ragnarok also set up Avengers: Infinity War,[8] and Hemsworth spoke to Infinity War directors Anthony and Joe Russo before receiving the script for Ragnarok to see how it would link to Infinity War. He said Ragnarok "definitely bleeds nicely into those [films]",[5] and Winderbaum likened Ragnarok's impact on the larger MCU to that of Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014), saying it would break down ideas regarding Asgard that were previously established similar "to how Winter Soldier broke down S.H.I.E.L.D."[5]

Filming

Filming of Thor: Ragnarok in Brisbane's central business district, which doubled as Manhattan
Principal photography began on July 4, 2016,[98][110] under the working title Creature Report,[111][112] at Village Roadshow Studios in Oxenford, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia,[80] exclusively using all nine of the studios' sound stages.[113] Additional filming was to occur throughout the state of Queensland,[80] including Tamborine National Park.[22] The Brisbane central business district, where filming took place from August 22 to 25,[25][111][114] was used to double as New York City.[115] Javier Aguirresarobe served as cinematographer on the film,[110][116] describing his work on the film as "a rare combination of satisfaction and frustration", feeling that he was mostly there to service the director and visual effects supervisor, but felt "very happy to have been able to respond to such incredible technical requirements".[117]

Later in July, regarding the film's "buddy-style comedy" nature, Waititi said that the script had changed from then and it was still unclear what the final film would look like, but there "are buddy elements to it between Thor and the Hulk".[72] He said it would be a "'70s/'80s sci-fi fantasy" and "the most 'out there' of all the Marvel movies",[118] with the tone closest to that of Big Trouble in Little China.[70] Inspiration for the road-trip aspect of the film included 48 Hrs. (1982), Withnail and I (1987), and Planes, Trains and Automobiles (1987).[8] Waititi also asked the heads of each department to watch Flash Gordon (1980) before beginning work.[119] Concept art released at San Diego Comic Con 2016 revealed that the character Fenris Wolf would appear.[120][121]

By August, over 100 set and construction workers were given termination notifications, with some complaining that they had been promised work until October or November 2016, and that New Zealand crew members were receiving preferential treatment over the Australian locals. However, Premier Palaszczuk stated that the work for set builders simply "finished", and that other jobs would become available as actors arrived for filming.[122] Sets constructed for the film were for Sakaar, including the Grandmaster's palace and surrounding junkyard, as well as Asgard (based on the aesthetics of the previous Thor films).[22] The interior of the Avenger Quinjet, which was built for The Avengers (2012), was shipped to Australia.[112] Waititi, who is Māori, made hiring Indigenous and Aboriginal Australians, along with New Zealanders, a priority for the various departments, saying, "It's a responsibility you have to the Indigenous people. You're coming to a country and you're bringing money into the economy and creating jobs but I think you have an even bigger responsibility to look after the people that have less opportunities." He added that having these people on the crew "feel[s] very much like family" and "helps calm me down and makes me feel relaxed". The Indigenous and Aboriginals were hired as part of an initiative by Screen Australia's Indigenous Department, whose mission is "to give Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders a foot in the door of the film industry".[123]

In mid-September 2016, concept art seen during a set visit indicated Midgard Serpent would appear,[124] and that Sif and the Warriors Three, allies of Thor in the previous two films, would be addressed in Ragnarok.[32] Towards the end of the month, Sam Neill, who worked with Waititi in Hunt for the Wilderpeople, revealed he had a role in the film.[49] Shortly after, Waititi teased the inclusion of the characters Korg,[125] who Waititi portrays through motion-capture,[44] and Miek,[126] who is not portrayed by an actor as he does not speak in the film, and is depicted as "a larva-like creature... [with] cybernetic legs and arms".[44] In mid-October, Waititi revealed that new camera technology had been used for a shot in the film, and that he had hoped to include John C. Reilly's Nova Corpsman Rhomann Dey in the film, but there was "no real way to pull it off".[118] Principal photography wrapped on October 28, 2016.[127] Second unit filming took place on Dirk Hartog Island off the coast of Australia, and in the South Island of New Zealand.[22] According to Waititi, 80 percent of the dialogue in Thor: Ragnarok was improvised, in order to create a "very loose and collaborate mood" among the cast, and as an attempt to replicate the tone and sensibility from his previous films. He stated, "My style of working is I'll often be behind the camera, or right next to the camera yelling words at people, like, 'Say this, say this! Say it this way!'"[128]

Post-production
In January 2017, it was revealed that Pearson would receive sole screenwriting credit on the film, with the story credited to Kyle, Yost, and Folsom.[129] These credits were later updated the following September, with Pearson as the screenwriter and story credit for Kyle and Yost. Folsom took issue with Marvel marketing the film with these credits, noting the Writers Guild of America (WGA) had yet to determine the final credits for the film.[130] She later said that Marvel had given her a story credit on the film, but it was denied by the WGA due to their regulation that a maximum of two individuals can receive story credit, with an allowance for a writing team to count as one individual; Pearson and the team of Kyle and Yost received the story credit on Ragnarok. Folsom added that she planned to appeal the decision, and that Marvel has been supportive of her throughout her attempt to receive credit.[131] By the end of the month, the writing credits were updated once again, this time simply crediting Pearson, Kyle, and Yost as screenwriters.[88][92][132]

In February 2017, Rachel House said she had a small role in the film, having worked with Waititi before.[43] Additional filming took place in Atlanta in July 2017, over three weeks,[133][134] including filming post-credit scenes.[135] One of these introduces the spaceship Sanctuary II, which belongs to Thanos in Avengers: Infinity War,[4] while the other, shown at the end of the credits, features the Grandmaster. Goldblum and Waititi improvised multiple versions of the latter scene; one unused version involved the singing of the Sakaarian national anthem, which was "made up on the spot".[136] Also filmed in Atlanta was the completion of a sequence where Asgardian actors perform a play based on the events of The Dark World. Neill appears in the sequence as the Odin actor, and Hemsworth's brother Luke portrays the Thor actor.[137] Explaining the sequence, Waititi said, "if I was Loki and I was ruling Asgard, I would write a play about myself and force everyone to go and see it—change the details of the play and get a huge celebrity to play myself." For the Loki actor, they "really wanted someone good and someone who's funny", and Chris Hemsworth suggested that Matt Damon, whom he knew personally, take on the role.[50] Damon was in New York City at the time, and flew to Atlanta just to shoot the cameo "on a lark".[50][137] Also changed during reshoots was the location of the sequence where Thor and Loki find Odin on Earth, and Hela subsequently destroys Mjolnir. Originally set in a New York City alley, Waititi decided that the environment was distracting from the emotions of the sequence. The location was changed to Norway, which Waititi felt gave more weight to the scenes, made Odin's storyline more "authentic", and also allowed the characters and the audience to "chill out for a second, and have that moment, because the rest of the film basically just runs at a clip".[39]

By the time the reshoots for the film were completed, the film had been cut down from Waititi's initial version of two hours and forty minutes to around ninety minutes, with that expected to increase slightly with the newly filmed scenes. However, after the film's 2017 Comic Con panel, it was decided to add back a lot of the jokes that had been removed, with the final runtime being two hours and ten minutes.[119] Joel Negron and Zene Baker served as editors on the film.[22][112] Waititi described the process of deciding exactly what jokes to keep as "very tricky ... sometimes it would be funny in the beginning of the film and then not funny at all [or] it was funny in the wrong places and in the end, we had to just keep testing jokes and testing parts of the film".[138] Ragnarok also clarifies that an Infinity Gauntlet seen in Thor was a fake. Feige expanded, saying that it had been included in Thor as an easter egg, since Marvel Studios was "working on The Avengers and trying to [put] that all together for the conclusion of Phase One." However, shortly after The Avengers released and the studio began to solidify plans for Avengers: Infinity War, they realized that the gauntlet seen in Thor could not be the actual one, creating an internal theory that it was fake; this resulted in the scene in Ragnarok, which was created "just [to have] the opportunity to call it a fake".[137]

Visual effects

Original (top) and effects (bottom) shots of the Valkyrie flashback sequence in Thor: Ragnarok
Visual effects for the film were created by Industrial Light & Magic's (ILM) San Francisco and Vancouver studios,[139] with help from Base FX, Animatrik, and Virtuos; Framestore; Method Studios Vancouver; Digital Domain; Rising Sun Pictures; Luma Pictures; D Negative; Iloura; Image Engine; Trixter; The Secret Lab; WhiskeyTree Inc; Fin Designs + Effects; and Perception.[22] Previsualization work was provided by The Third Floor and Day for Nite.[22][140] Luma Pictures produced over 200 shoots in eight sequences, particularly for the characters Korg (receiving assets from Framestore) and Miek. Method Studios provided over 450 shots, including Thor's opening fight against Surtur in Muspelheim and Hela's fight against the Asgardian guards. D Negative worked on over 190 shots, creating the environment for the planet Sakaar, including its junkyard landscape and wormholes, with the wormholes also created through a collaboration with Digital Domain.[141]

ILM, who worked on previous incarnations of the Hulk, had to add much more detail to the character's facial features in Ragnarok due to the Hulk's increased dialogue. ILM visual effects supervisor Chad Wiebe explained that Ruffalo's expressions were captured fresh for the film using Medusa, a performance capture technology. With 90 different expressions captured, ILM "built an entirely new library that would allow [Hulk] to cover a full range of normal human visual characteristics."[141] To help create the Hulk, a person on set was covered in green body paint, and would replicate the intended motions of the character to aid the visual effect artists.[78] Additionally, stunt actor Paul Lowe, who is under 5 feet (1.5 m) tall, stood in for Hemsworth during some of his interactions with the Hulk so that the Hulk's stunt men would be proportionally correct. In some instances when Thor and the Hulk interacted, a digital double was used for Thor, also created by ILM, to have greater flexibility for the shots. ILM worked on all of the Hulk moments in the film outside the final fight sequence, which was completed by Framestore using ILM's assets, as Framestore was primarily responsible for rigging that sequence. Framestore completed nearly 460 shots, which featured digital doubles of Thor and Hela, Fenris, Korg, Miek, the giant Surtur at the end of the film, and over 9,000 buildings for Asgard, based on assets D Negative had from The Dark World, resulting in over 263 character, vehicle, prop, and crowd rigs.[141]

Rising Sun Pictures produced more than 170 visual effects shots for Thor: Ragnarok. They worked on the Valkyrie flashback sequence, with the sequence's surreal ethereal appearance achieved through a combination of motion capture, computer graphics, a 900 fps high-speed frame rate, and a special 360-degree lighting rig containing 200 strobe lights to bathe the scene in undulating patterns of light and shadow. Rising Sun also helped create the various CGI aspects of Hela, such as her "hair wipe transition" to her horns, and her original introduction in New York City. Following the reshoots, ImageEngine completed the new Norway introduction since Rising Sun was focused on the palace fight by then.[142]

Music
Main article: Thor: Ragnarok (soundtrack)
By August 2016, Mark Mothersbaugh was hired to score the film.[143][144] The synthesized score is influenced by the work of Jean-Michel Jarre.[19] Waititi stated he would have asked the band Queen to work on the soundtrack for the film if their lead singer Freddie Mercury was still alive, because the film is "a cool, bold, colorful cosmic adventure" which would have suited the "feel" of the band.[145] Additional music featured in the film include "Immigrant Song" by Led Zeppelin and "Pure Imagination" from the film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971). Patrick Doyle's themes from Thor and Brian Tyler's themes from The Dark World and Avengers: Age of Ultron, as well as Joe Harnell's "The Lonely Man" theme from The Incredible Hulk series, are also used in the film.[22] Hollywood Records released the film's soundtrack digitally on October 20, 2017, and physically on November 10, 2017.[146]

Marketing
At the 2016 San Diego Comic-Con, a physical model of Hulk's gladiator armor was revealed,[147] concept art and rough animatics were shown,[120] and a "mockumentary" short titled Team Thor was screened. Directed by Waititi, it showed what Thor and Banner were doing during the events of Civil War,[120][148] with Daley Pearson appearing as Thor's Australian flatmate Darryl Jacobson. The short was released online in August 2016,[148] and with the digital download of Captain America: Civil War the following month.[149] Team Thor: Part 2 was released on the home media of Doctor Strange in February 2017, with Pearson reprising his role.[148][150] Footage and concept art for the film were shown at CinemaCon 2017.[151]

On April 10, 2017, the first teaser trailer was released. Sandy Schaefer of Screen Rant felt it was "a strong start" for the film, having "a distinctly playful vibe" by setting it to "Immigrant Song".[152] The Verge's Chaim Gartenberg said "this may be the weirdest Marvel movie to date" thanks to the costumes, makeup, and '80s aesthetic.[153] Michael Arbeiter for Nerdist was pleased with the teaser, stating, "nothing in the MCU thus far can hold a candle to the imagination promised by this ... have any of [the previous MCU films] felt this beholden to what we've always known and loved as the adventure genre?"[154] The teaser was viewed 136 million times in 24 hours, the third-highest in that time frame, behind The Fate of the Furious (139 million) and It (197 million). It also became Disney and Marvel's most viewed trailer within that time period, surpassing Beauty and the Beast (127 million) and Captain America: Civil War (94 million), respectively.[155] The line from the trailer of Thor saying Hulk "is a friend from work" was suggested to Hemsworth by a Make-A-Wish child visiting the set on the day the scene was filmed.[156]

Props and costumes from the film were on display at D23 Expo 2017 along with set pieces for photo opportunities.[157] The costumes were also on display at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con,[158] where Waitti and cast members promoted the film. Exclusive clips were shown, along with a new trailer.[13][23] Ethan Anderton of /Film felt "the blend of comedy and bright, vibrant comic book action" in the trailer was "incredible".[159] Collider's Haleigh Foutch was "in love with this trailer" and "all in" on the film.[160] Germain Lussier for io9 called the trailer "a two-and-a-half-minute ball of action, awesomeness, humor, and insanity that may be the most purely fun Marvel movie trailer we've ever seen."[161] The poster also released was praised, being called by Anthony Couto from Comic Book Resources as "quite stunning", "insanely colorful", and "perfectly symmetrical",[162] with Matt Goldberg of Collider feeling it "really [lets] you know that this Thor movie is going to be radically different than the first two".[163] Due to the Comic-Con presentation, Thor: Ragnarok generated over 264,000 new conversations on social media from July 17 to 23, the most out of any film during that time period, according to comScore and its PreAct service.[164] It remained the most-discussed film on social media for two more weeks.[165][166]

In August 2017, Marvel partnered with car manufacturer Renault on a commercial supporting the release of the Kwid in Brazil. Directed by Jonathan Gurvit and shot in São Paulo, it features the Hulk destroying a satellite headed towards the city. Framestore worked on visual effects for the commercial, building on the foundation they had from working on the character in previous films.[167][168] Also in August, Marvel, in partnership with Dolby Laboratories, Synchrony Bank, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Broadcom Masters, and Society for Science & the Public, announced the "Superpower of STEM Challenge", aimed at females aged 15 through 18 in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics education) fields, to "create an original Do-It-Yourself project that can be replicated by others" and "help their family, community or the world be safer, healthier or happier". Five winners would attend the film's world premiere, receive a tour of Walt Disney Studios, and a $500 saving account from Synchrony Bank, with one grand prize winner attending "an immersive three-day mentorship in New York City with Disney Imagineering" to create a "professional-level video teaching other young people how to recreate" their winning project. They were also given the opportunity to demonstrate the project on Good Morning America.[169]

For the week of August 21, Ragnarok once again had the most social media conversations, according to comScore and its PreAct service. New clips of Thor and Hulk fighting, released on the same day as the Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Conor McGregor fight, helped generate the 57,000 new conversations for the week.[170] From September 25 to October 15, Ragnarok had the second-most social media conversations according to the service,[171][172] and was once again first for the week of October 16 following the release of extended clips and plot details.[173] Beginning October 6, 2017, Disney California Adventure showed a sneak peek of the film at the Sunset Showcase Theater in Hollywood Land, presented in 3D with "special in-theater effects".[174] Ahead of the United States release of the film, Hemsworth, Hiddleston, Blanchett, Goldblum, Ruffalo, and Thompson appeared with James Corden on The Late Late Show with James Corden to present a "4D" version of the film, which was actually a stage play. The cast performed various scenes from the film live in low-budget costumes and with cardboard stage props.[175] Additional promotional partners of the film included Red Robin, United Healthcare, and Screenvision Media.[176]

Release
Theatrical

Mark Ruffalo (center left) and Chris Hemsworth (center right) at the Sydney premiere of Thor: Ragnarok
Thor: Ragnarok had its world premiere at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on October 10, 2017,[177][178] and its Australian premiere took place on October 13, on the Gold Coast.[179] It was released in the United Kingdom on October 24, 2017,[180] with additional international releases on October 25,[109] and in Australia on October 26.[181] The film was released in the United States and Canada on November 3,[59] in 4,080 theaters, of which over 3,400 were 3D, 381 were IMAX and IMAX 3D, and 204 were D-Box.[182] The film opened in 1,187 IMAX theaters globally, which was a November opening weekend record.[176] It was originally scheduled for release on July 28, 2017.[3] Thor: Ragnarok is part of Phase Three of the MCU.[3]

Home media
Thor: Ragnarok was released on digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on February 20, 2018, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, DVD and On-Demand on March 6. The digital and Blu-ray releases include behind-the-scenes featurettes; audio commentary; deleted scenes; a blooper reel; and Team Darryl, a continuation of the "mockumentary" short films Team Thor and Team Thor: Part 2, in which the Grandmaster moves in with Darryl after Thor leaves.[183] In one of the deleted scenes, Michael Rooker makes an appearance as Yondu, reprising the role from the first two Guardians of the Galaxy films. James Gunn, writer and director of the Guardians films, clarified that Yondu was never meant to appear in the final film, and that Rooker was on a nearby set recording material for the Halloween variant of the theme park attraction Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!; and decided to stop by the Ragnarok set "to goof around".[184]

The film debuted at number one on the NPD VideoScan overall disc sales chart during its first week of release, which tracks combined DVD and Blu-ray Disc unit sales, and a dedicated Blu-ray disc sales chart. Blu-ray accounted for 83% of unit sales, with 11% coming from Ultra HD Blu-ray. Thor: Ragnarok also debuted second on the Media Play News rental chart behind Coco.[185] In its second week, the film fell to number two on the NPD VideoScan chart, coming in behind Justice League, but rose to number one on the Media Play News rental chart.[186]

Reception
Box office
Thor: Ragnarok grossed $315.1 million in the United States and Canada, and $538.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $854 million.[2] In September 2017, a survey from Fandango indicated that Ragnarok was the most anticipated fall film.[187] On the weekend of November 3, 2017, the film earned $25.4 million from IMAX showings, surpassing Doctor Strange as the largest for a November weekend.[176] The film had earned $650.1 million globally, surpassing the total grosses for Thor ($449.3 million) and Thor: The Dark World ($644.6 million), by the end of its third weekend.[188][189] It became the ninth highest-grossing film of 2017.[190] Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $174.2 million, accounting for its production budget, P&A, talent participation and other costs, against box office grosses and ancillary revenue from home media, placing it eighth on their list of 2017's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[191]

Thor: Ragnarok earned $46.8 million on its opening day in the United States and Canada (including $14.5 million from Thursday night previews), and had a total weekend gross of $122.7 million, which was the top film for the weekend, the sixth-best November opening, and the largest opening for all Thor films. IMAX contributed $12.2 million, which was the second-best IMAX opening of 2017 and its third-best November opening. The film's earnings on Sunday ($32.1 million), was the second-best Sunday in November after The Hunger Games: Catching Fire (2013) ($34.5 million).[176] The film had been projected to gross $100–125 million in its opening weekend.[192][193] Ragnarok remained the number one film in its second weekend, having earned a total of $211.6 million, which surpassed the entire runs of Thor ($181 million) and The Dark World ($206.4 million).[194] In its third weekend, Thor: Ragnarok fell to third at the box office,[195] and fourth in its fourth and fifth weekends.[196][197] The film surpassed its projected total domestic gross of $280 million in its fifth weekend with $291.4 million,[197][198] Thor: Ragnarok was fifth in its sixth weekend,[199] and seventh in its seventh weekend, the final weekend it remained in the top 10.[200]

Outside the United States and Canada, the film opened in 36 markets in its first weekend, ranking first in all, and earning $109.1 million, $6 million of which came from 189 IMAX screens. The United Kingdom opening ($16.2 million) was the best October opening for a non-James Bond film. South Korea ($15.7 million), Australia ($8.4 million), Brazil ($8.1 million), Indonesia ($5.5M), Taiwan ($5.4M), the Philippines ($3.8M), Malaysia ($3.5M), New Zealand, Vietnam, Argentina, Colombia, Chile, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Croatia, and South Africa had the best October opening weekend ever, while France ($7.7 million) had the second-best. Brazil also had the third-best debut for an MCU film, while New Zealand's opening was the biggest of 2017.[201] In its second weekend, Ragnarok opened at number one in 19 more markets, with the largest November opening ever in China ($56.3 million, including $6 million from 446 IMAX screens), Mexico ($10.8 million), Germany ($8.9 million), and India ($5.5 million). It also remained at number one in many existing markets. The film earned an additional $13.2 million from 788 IMAX screens, the best November opening.[202] In its third weekend, the film remained at number one in over 30 countries, and became the highest-grossing superhero film in the Czech Republic.[189] By its fifth weekend, Ragnarok had become the highest-grossing superhero film in central and eastern Europe.[203] As of December 10, 2017, the film's largest markets were China ($112 million), the United Kingdom ($40.4 million), and South Korea ($35.1 million).[190]

Critical response






The performances of (top, L to R) Chris Hemsworth, Tom Hiddleston, Cate Blanchett, (bottom, L to R) Jeff Goldblum, Tessa Thompson, and Mark Ruffalo were widely praised by critics.[204]
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 93% approval rating with an average score of 7.58/10, based on 418 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Exciting, funny, and above all fun, Thor: Ragnarok is a colorful cosmic adventure that sets a new standard for its franchise—and the rest of the Marvel Cinematic Universe."[205] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 74 out of 100 based on 51 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[206] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, the best of the Thor series, while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a 90% overall positive score and an 85% "definite recommend".[176]

Sheri Linden of The Hollywood Reporter praised Waititi's handling of "the clash-of-worlds CGI extravaganza", particularly for the lighter tone he brought, with "even the story's central bad guys [being] silly fun, hammed to the hilt by Cate Blanchett and Jeff Goldblum."[207] Alonso Duralde of TheWrap wrote, "Both the banter and the fighting, it should be noted, are excellent, so whether you go to superhero movies for the glossy escapism or the pulse-pounding action, you'll get your large soda's worth."[208] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone rated the film three stars out of four, described it as "the most fun you'll ever have at a Marvel movie" while praising the film's changing tone and direction, comparing it favourably to Guardians of the Galaxy.[209] The San Francisco Chronicle's Mick LaSalle lauded the performances of Hemsworth, Hiddleston, Blanchett, Thompson, Goldblum and Ruffalo, feeling the film "has confidence in its characters and in its own invention, and so it avoids repetition and stays fresh".[210]

Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times similarly praised the film, calling the performances of the ensemble cast "outstanding" and Waititi's direction "goofy and campy and marvelously self-referential". He also said the soundtrack that was used in the climactic battle sequence, particularly Led Zeppelin's "Immigrant Song" as being "perfectly synced".[211] Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film three out of four stars, positively comparing Hemsworth's performance to Cary Grant: "Hemsworth's charisma holds [Thor: Ragnarok] together whenever it threatens to spin apart".[212] Justin Chang of Los Angeles Times praised Blanchett's performance of Hela, drawing a comparison of the portrayal of her character to other iconic villains such as Maleficent and Chernabog, and the film's similar themes and tone to Flash Gordon, Star Wars (1977), and Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory.[213] The Daily Telegraph's Robbie Collin gave the film four out of five, hailed it as "one of [Marvel's] best films to date" while commending the performances and describing Mark Mothersbaugh's musical score as "turbo-charged".[214] Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune commended the performances of Hiddleston and Thompson as being "wonderfully matched". He also noted a similar directing style of Waititi to Edgar Wright's "parodic work" and labelled the film as "unusually lively and buoyant" while acknowledging the effect of a "Marvel Fatigue factor" towards the audiences.[215]

Peter Debruge of Variety called the movie "preposterous", but praised Goldblum's performance.[216] Stephanie Zacharek of Time magazine stated negatively that "Thor: Ragnarok is packed tight with zooming space vehicles and noisy thunder battles, but the movie's extravagant excess is more narcotizing than energizing." Zacharek further added that "Even poor Thor seems lost in all of it, and he's supposed to be its star" while criticizing the film's visual effects as being "an instance of fun overkill" and "a special-effects coma".[217] Manohla Dargis of The New York Times called the story "an uninteresting thicket of brawls, machinations and useful coincidences" but did feel that Hemsworth "looks happier and far more relaxed in Ragnarok than he did in the previous Thor vehicles, which is perhaps Mr. Waititi's truest achievement here."[218]

Some critics claim that Thor: Ragnarok conceals sophisticated commentary under its comedic presentation, specifically on themes of colonial history and indigenous people. Key points in this discourse include Waititi's own indigenous Māori heritage;[219] Asgard's bloody history and Odin's whitewashing of it, as revealed by Hela; Scrapper 142's burial in alcohol of her ethnic identity as a Valkyrie;[220][221] and the Grandmaster's euphemizing of "slaves" as "prisoners with jobs".[222]

Accolades
Year	Award	Category	Recipient(s)	Result	Ref(s)
2017	Washington D.C. Film Critics Awards	Best Motion Capture Performance	Taika Waititi	Nominated	[223]
2018	Golden Tomato Awards	Best Wide Release 2017	Thor: Ragnarok	10th Place	[224]
Best Comic Book/Graphic Novel Movie 2017	Thor: Ragnarok	3rd Place
Critics' Choice Awards	Best Action Movie	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated	[225]
Best Actor in a Comedy	Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Best Visual Effects	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated
NAACP Image Awards	Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture	Idris Elba	Won	[226]
[227]
Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture	Tessa Thompson	Nominated
Visual Effects Society Awards	Outstanding Virtual Cinematography in a Photoreal Project	Hubert Maston, Arthur Moody, Adam Paschke, Casey Schatz for "Valkyrie's Flashback"	Nominated	[228]
Outstanding Compositing in a Photoreal Feature	Gavin McKenzie, David Simpson, Owen Carroll, Mark Gostlow for "Bridge Battle"	Nominated
Costume Designers Guild Awards	Excellence in Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film	Mayes C. Rubeo	Nominated	[229]
Empire Awards	Best Film	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated	[230]
Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated
Best Director	Taika Waititi	Nominated
Best Female Newcomer	Tessa Thompson	Nominated
Best Production Design	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated
Best Visual Effects	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated
Best Costume Design	Mayes C. Rubeo	Nominated
Best Makeup and Hairstyling	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated
MTV Movie & TV Awards	Scene Stealer	Taika Waititi	Nominated	[231]
Best Fight	Chris Hemsworth vs. Mark Ruffalo	Nominated
Saturn Awards	Best Comic-to-Motion Picture Release	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated	[232]
Best Supporting Actress in a Film	Tessa Thompson	Nominated
Hugo Award	Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form	Eric Pearson, Craig Kyle, Christopher Yost, Taika Waititi	Nominated	[233]
Teen Choice Awards	Choice Sci-Fi Movie	Thor: Ragnarok	Nominated	[234]
Choice Sci-Fi Movie Actor	Chris Hemsworth	Won
Mark Ruffalo	Nominated
Choice Sci-Fi Movie Actress	Tessa Thompson	Nominated
Choice Movie Villain	Cate Blanchett	Nominated
Choice Scene Stealer	Tom Hiddleston	Nominated
Taika Waititi	Nominated
Hollywood Professional Association	Outstanding Visual Effects - Feature Film	Kyle McCulloch, Alexis Wajsbrot, Ben Loch, Harry Bardak (Framestore)	Nominated	[235]
Sequel
Further information: Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Four
By the release of Ragnarok, Waititi and Marvel had discussed a spin-off Marvel One-Shot short film following the characters Korg and Miek, but it was unfeasible due to Marvel's commitment to producing three feature films a year. Feige said Marvel still had plans for those characters, but did not specify.[236] In January 2018, Hemsworth indicated his interest in continuing to play Thor, despite his contract with Marvel Studios scheduled to end after Avengers: Endgame,[237] saying the next month "if there's another great script that comes along" he would consider playing the character again,[238] and later added, "I'd play this character for as long as anyone would let me," crediting Waititi for revitalizing his interest in Thor.[239] He and Waititi had discussed what they would want in a potential fourth Thor film by then.[240]

By April 2019, Thompson believed that a pitch had been made for a sequel to Ragnarok that involved Waititi returning.[241] By July 2019, Waititi had signed a deal with Marvel to write and direct a fourth Thor film, titled Thor: Love and Thunder.[242] It was also revealed that Natalie Portman would return to portray Jane Foster taking on the mantle of a female incarnation of Thor, in a manner similar to the comics.[243] Thompson will reprise her role as Valkyrie who, after being declared King of New Asgard, will begin searching for her queen, revealing her to be the MCU's first major LGBTQ character.[244] In October 2019, Waititi confirmed that Korg will return in Love and Thunder.[245] In January 2020, Christian Bale entered talks to join the sequel,[246] and in March was confirmed by Thompson to have been cast as the villain.[247] In February 2020, Jennifer Kaytin Robinson was brought on board to co-write the screenplay with Waititi.[248] In March 2020, Vin Diesel, who voices Groot in the MCU films, stated that the Guardians of the Galaxy would be incorporated in the film.[249] Thor: Love and Thunder is scheduled for release on February 11, 2022.[250]

Notes
 As depicted in the 2015 film Avengers: Age of Ultron.[3]
 According to producer Kevin Feige, the spaceship seen in the mid-credits scene is the Sanctuary II, which belongs to Thanos.[4]
References
 Thor Ragnarok, British Board of Film Classification, archived from the original on October 14, 2017, retrieved October 13, 2017
 "Thor: Ragnarok (2017)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 28, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018.
 Strom, Marc (October 28, 2014). "Thor Brings Ragnarok to the Marvel Cinematic Universe in 2017". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Owen, Phil; Gonzalez, Umberto (November 2, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok': Marvel Boss Kevin Feige Explains That Mid-Credits Scene". TheWrap. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2017.
 Cook, Tommy (September 7, 2017). "Here's How 'Thor: Ragnarok' Ties into the Larger MCU". Collider. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Law, James (July 24, 2017). "Chris Hemsworth on working with Cate Blanchett and off-set 'shenanigans' on Thor: Ragnarok". News.com.au. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved July 24, 2017.
 Stack, Tim (November 4, 2017). "Chris Hemsworth says Thor will still be [Spoiler] in Avengers: Infinity War". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017.
 Stack, Tim (March 9, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok: Why does Thor have short hair? Where's his hammer? The plot revealed!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 9, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2017.
 Cook, Tommy (September 7, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok': Why (and How) the Sequel Pivots Away from the Previous 'Thor' Movies". Collider. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (October 28, 2014). "Marvel Studios reveals Phase Three slate, including two-part 'Avengers' threequel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Strom, Marc (May 20, 2016). "Marvel Studios Confirms Stellar New Cast Members of the Highly Anticipated 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2016.
 Mueller, Matthew (June 4, 2016). "Tom Hiddleston Teases Loki and the Hulk in Thor 3: Ragnarok". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved June 5, 2016.
 Breznican, Anthony (July 22, 2017). "Hulk speaks in awesome new trailer for Thor: Ragnarok". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 Vevjoda, Jim (September 8, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok: Odin Knew of Cosmic Threats That Thor and Loki Didn't". IGN. Archived from the original on September 9, 2017. Retrieved September 8, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (December 10, 2015). "Cate Blanchett Joining 'Thor 3'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 11, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
 Shepherd, Jack (October 18, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok spoilers given away by TV host, Chris Hemsworth unimpressed". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved October 18, 2017.
 Stack, Tim (March 8, 2017). "This Week's Cover: Thor gets a makeover in Ragnarok first look". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 8, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Polowy, Kevin (November 10, 2017). "The big reveal, the nixed romance, and the noodle worm: What was cut from (and added to) 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on November 18, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2017.
 Woerner, Meredith (September 1, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' cast introduces the newest members of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 1, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 Cook, Tommy (September 7, 2017). "How 'Thor: Ragnarok' Honors & Deviates from Its Comics Foundation". Collider. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Busch, Jenna (July 23, 2017). "Comic-Con: Tessa Thompson, Karl Urban and Taiki Waititi on Thor". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 "Thor: Ragnarok Press Kit" (PDF). Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017.
 Burton, Bonnie (July 22, 2017). "Comic-Con 2017: 'Black Panther,' 'Infinity War' blew us away at the Marvel panel". CNET. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (May 20, 2016). "Jeff Goldblum, Karl Urban Join Marvel's 'Thor: Ragnarok'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2016.
 De Semlyen, Phil (June 6, 2016). "Jeff Goldblum talks Thor: Ragnarok's Grandmaster". Empire. Archived from the original on June 6, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2016.
 Vejvoda, Jim (April 19, 2017). "Why Jeff Goldblum Doesn't Resemble Marvel Comics' Grandmaster in Thor: Ragnarok". IGN. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017.
 Davis, Eric (October 30, 2017). "Jeff Goldblum's Grandmaster and Benecio del Toro's Collector Will Likely Appear in a Marvel Movie Together". Fandango. Archived from the original on October 30, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Lipsitz, Jordana (May 20, 2016). "Who Is Valkyrie? Tessa Thompson's Character In 'Thor: Ragnarok' Is Perfect For Her". Bustle. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved November 8, 2017.
 Stack, Tim (March 10, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok actress Tessa Thompson talks redefining Valkyrie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 10, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017.
 Stack, Tim (March 14, 2017). "Where is Natalie Portman's Jane Foster in Thor: Ragnarok?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 14, 2017. Retrieved March 14, 2017.
 Nicholson, Amy (October 31, 2017). "How Tessa Thompson Went From Indie Actor to 'Thor: Ragnarok' Badass". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 24, 2018. Retrieved May 24, 2018.
 Anderton, Ethan (September 7, 2017). "'Thor Ragnarok' Set Visit: Everything We Learned About the Cosmic Sequel – Page 2". /Film. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Busch, Anita (April 11, 2016). "Tessa Thompson Joins The Marvel Universe In 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2016.
 Collura, Scott (July 15, 2016). "Karl Urban Talks Prepping for Thor: Ragnarok". IGN. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016.
 Kroll, Justin (October 15, 2015). "Mark Ruffalo to Appear as Hulk in 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 15, 2015.
 Cornet, Roth (January 31, 2016). "Marvel still undecided about just HOW verbal Hulk will be in Thor: Ragnarok". Hitfix. Archived from the original on February 1, 2016. Retrieved February 1, 2016.
 Eisenberg, Eric (October 10, 2017). "Apparently Mark Ruffalo And Kevin Feige Have Planned A Special Trilogy for the Hulk". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on October 11, 2017. Retrieved October 10, 2017.
 Cook, Tommy (September 11, 2017). "Taika Waititi on 'Thor: Ragnarok', How the Story Changed When He Signed On, and More". Collider. Archived from the original on September 12, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2017.
 Butler, Tom (October 27, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok director explains why they reshot Hela's entrance (exclusive)". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on October 31, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Arvedon, Jon (September 27, 2017). "New Thor: Ragnarok Image Confirms Return of Another Asgardian". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 28, 2017. Retrieved September 27, 2017.
 Leadbetter, Alex (October 27, 2017). "Kevin Feige Explains the Warriors Three's Role in Thor: Ragnarok". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 29, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Breznican, Anthony (November 5, 2016). "Doctor Strange revelations: Secrets and Easter eggs from the new Marvel movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016.
 Hatchett, Keisha (February 28, 2017). "Interview: Moana's Rachel House on Marginalized Voices in Hollywood and the Need for More Female Directors". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved July 8, 2017.
 Lesnick, Silas (April 18, 2017). "Inside Marvel Studios: Explore the Future of the MCU". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017.
 Lawrence, Derek (April 18, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok director Taika Waititi to portray Korg in film". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 18, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017.
 Hoffer, Christian (July 22, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Director Confirms Korg". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 Davis, Brandon (July 23, 2017). "Clancy Brown Cast As Surtur in Thor: Ragnarok". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 Outlaw, Kofi (November 2, 2017). "Stan Lee's 'Thor: Ragnarok' Cameo Revealed". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 "Exclusive: Sam Neill confirms he's in Thor 3". ShortList. September 23, 2016. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved September 24, 2016.
 Na, Wenlei (October 26, 2017). "How Thor pulled off huge celebrity cameo". news.com.au. Archived from the original on October 29, 2017. Retrieved October 29, 2017.
 Francisco, Eric (November 3, 2017). "That Black Widow Cameo Explains Why Hulk Is in 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Inverse. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2019.
 "Chris Hemsworth Talks Ramping Up the Action for Thor: The Dark World". Access Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2013.
 Vejvoda, Jim (October 28, 2013). "Marvel Studios Boss Kevin Feige on the Possibility of Thor 3". IGN. Archived from the original on June 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2013.
 Sneider, Jeff (January 29, 2014). "Marvel Hires One of Its Own Executives to Co-Write 'Thor 3'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 30, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014.
 Weintraub, Steve (July 22, 2014). "Kevin Feige Talks Guardians of the Galaxy, Thor 3, Captain America 3, Doctor Strange, Casting Josh Brolin as Thanos, Comic-Con Plans, and More". Collider. Archived from the original on July 21, 2014.
 Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (October 11, 2018). "Scarlett Johansson Lands $15 Million Payday for Black Widow Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
 Davis, Justin (October 28, 2014). "Marvel Studios Announces Thor: Ragnarok". IGN. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
 Hewitt, Chris (February 2016). "Set Phase 3 To Stun". Empire. United Kingdom: Bauer Media Group. p. 21. Thor: Ragnarok (October 27, 2017)... For 'Ragnarok' is, according to Norse legend, the end of the world. Not so fast, says Feige. 'I don't think people will read into that title alone what the movie's going to be.' ... 'The film will take place within the cosmos primarily,' confirms Feige, 'which is to say, frankly, very little Earth.'
 Strom, Marc (February 10, 2015). "Marvel Studios Schedules New Release Dates for 4 Films". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2015.
 Lussier, Germain (April 12, 2015). "Kevin Feige Phase 3 Updates: 'Thor: Ragnarok,' 'Black Panther,' 'Inhumans' and 'Captain Marvel'". /Film. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015.
 Lussier, Germain (June 29, 2015). "Everything We Just Learned About The Future of Marvel Movies". io9. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved June 30, 2015.
 Chitwood, Adam (June 30, 2015). "Kevin Feige Reveals When Spider-Man, Thor 3, and More Start Filming". Collider. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved June 30, 2015.
 Ryan, Mike (June 29, 2015). "No, 'Terminator: Genisys' Director Alan Taylor Doesn't Like That Spoilerish Trailer, Either". Uproxx. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved November 13, 2015.
 Wickman, Kase (July 11, 2015). "Jamie Alexander Confirms Whether She'll Be Back For 'Thor: Ragnarok'". MTV. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved July 11, 2015.
 Woerner, Meredith (July 20, 2015). "Jaimie Alexander on being naked, tattooed and alone in Times Square for 'Blindspot'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015.
 Zuckerman, Esther (February 1, 2017). "Taika Waititi will cameo in his Thor movie". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved February 1, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (October 2, 2015). "'Thor 3' Finds Its Director". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015.
 Sciretta, Peter (November 4, 2016). "Kevin Feige on How a Marvel Movie Like 'Doctor Strange' Is Developed, & Why Time Travel Won't Ruin the MCU". /Film. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016.
 Bibbiani, William (January 24, 2016). "Taika Waititi on 'Wilderpeople' and 'Thor: Ragnarok'". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016.
 Stack, Tim (March 10, 2017). "How Big Trouble in Little China inspired Thor: Ragnarok". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 11, 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2017.
 Erao, Matthew (October 18, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok's Trailer Song Helped Taika Waititi Get Hired". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 18, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Alexander, Julia (July 15, 2016). "Thor: Ragnarok Director Talks Making One of Marvel's 'Biggest and Most Different' Movies". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016.
 Fleming, Mike (October 15, 2015). "Mark Ruffalo Bringing Hulk Into 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015.
 Kit, Borys (October 15, 2015). "Mark Ruffalo's Hulk to Appear in 'Thor: Ragnarok'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015.
 Breznican, Anthony (October 15, 2015). "Mark Ruffalo will bring the Hulk to Thor: Ragnarok". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015.
 Blickley, Leigh (October 23, 2015). "Mark Ruffalo Wants To See Bruce Banner And Hulk Face-Off on Screen". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 23, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2015.
 Gonzalez, Umberto (October 14, 2017). "Marvel's Kevin Feige: Hulk Almost Wasn't in 'Thor: Ragnarok'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2017.
 Cook, Tommy (September 7, 2017). "Everything You Need To Know About 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Collider. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Frater, Patrick (October 21, 2015). "Marvel's 'Thor: Ragnarok' and Fox's 'Alien' To Shoot in Australia". Variety. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Cronin, Seanna (October 23, 2015). "Thor: Ragnarok to film exclusively in Queensland". Sunshine Coast Daily. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015.
 IANS (September 27, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok is One of The Best Shoots I've Been Part of: Chris Hemsworth". CNN-News18. Archived from the original on October 31, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Lee, Ben (November 16, 2015). "Is Stellan Skarsgard coming back for Thor: Ragnarok? 'They have an option on me'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 1, 2015. Retrieved November 30, 2015.
 Leane, Rob (February 25, 2016). "Stellan Skarsgård is in Avengers: Infinity War, but not Thor 3". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved February 25, 2016.
 Kit, Borys (December 2, 2015). "'Thor 3' Lands New Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 3, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2015.
 Butler, Tom (January 25, 2016). "Mark Ruffalo Promises Epic Arc For Hulk Across Thor 3 and Infinity War". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2016.
 De Semlyen, Phil (January 20, 2016). "Mark Ruffalo says Thor: Ragnarok is a road movie across the universe". Empire. Archived from the original on January 20, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2016.
 Weintraub, Steve (January 28, 2016). "Taika Waititi on 'Hunt for the Wilderpeople', 'Thor: Ragnarok' and Disney's 'Moana'". Collider. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved January 29, 2016.
 Couch, Aaron (November 2, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Writer on the Secret to Revitalizing a Franchise". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017.
 Simonot, Suzanne (February 4, 2016). "Samuel L. Jackson tipped to return to Gold Coast for Thor: Ragnarok". Gold Coast Bulletin. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2016.
 Damore, Meagan (March 10, 2016). "'Thor's' Jaimie Alexander Addresses Whether Or Not She'll Return For 'Ragnarok'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2016.
 Cook, Juston (May 21, 2016). "Jaimie Alexander may be in Thor: Ragnarok after all". Flickering Myth. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved October 17, 2017.
 Keyes, Rob (October 16, 2017). "Why Isn't Lady Sif in Thor: Ragnarok?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved October 16, 2017.
 Ryder, Taryn (October 27, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok': Jaimie Alexander explains why Lady Sif is MIA". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on November 3, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2017.
 Boone, John (November 2, 2017). "How Chris Hemsworth Convinced [Spoiler] to Make That Secret Cameo in 'Thor: Ragnarok' (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018. Retrieved June 19, 2018.
 Davis, Brandon (May 13, 2016). "Kevin Feige Confirms No Natalie Portman in Thor: Ragnarok". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016.
 Kit, Borys (April 11, 2016). "'Creed' Star Tessa Thompson Joining 'Thor 3'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016.
 Eisenberg, Eric (October 30, 2017). "Were The Thor Series' Human Characters Ever in Ragnarok? Here's What The Writer Told Us". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on October 30, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Simonot, Suzanne (June 6, 2016). "Blockbuster to be born on Fourth of July as Marvel confirms Thor: Ragnarok start date". The Advertiser (Adelaide). Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2016.
 Hunt, James (October 26, 2016). "Doctor Strange: post-credits scenes explained". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on October 28, 2016. Retrieved October 27, 2016.
 Hunt, James (October 28, 2016). "Exclusive: Scott Derrickson explains Doctor Strange's ending". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on October 29, 2016. Retrieved October 29, 2016.
 Damore, Meagan (December 30, 2015). "Feige Teases Cosmic 'Thor: Ragnarok,' Thanos' Next Move & More Phase 3 Plans". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 3, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
 Wolfe, April (May 17, 2017). "Marvel Science: Meet the Physicist Called in to Consult on Superhero Movies". Houston Press. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2017.
 King, Darryn (July 6, 2018). "The Science (and the Scientists) Behind 'Ant-Man'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2018.
 "2017 Hit List". Total Film (254): 82. January 2017. via: "Planet Hulk's Sakaar Confirmed For 'Thor: Ragnarok'". MCUExchange.com. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2016
 Anderton, Ethan (September 7, 2017). "'Thor Ragnarok' Set Visit: Everything We Learned About the Cosmic Sequel". /Film. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Fujikawa, Jenn (October 19, 2017). "Jack Kirby's Design Influence Is A Force In 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 Reyes, Mike. "What The Thor Movies Need To Do Better, According To Chris Hemsworth". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 24, 2015.
 Kirkland, Chris (December 4, 2015). "Chris Hemsworth re-teams with Ron Howard for adventure 'In the Heart of the Sea'". Toronto Sun. Archived from the original on January 3, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 22, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Trailer Stomps Into Hall H With Battling Superheroes – Comic-Con". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 Damore, Meagan (July 5, 2016). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Director Taika Waititi Celebrates The Start Of Filming With New Photo". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 5, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2016.
 "Thor: Ragnarok filming in Brisbane causes road closures". Brisbane Times. August 17, 2016. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 18, 2016.
 Kois, Dan (October 19, 2017). "The Superweirdo Behind 'Thor: Ragnarok'". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017.
 Simonot, Suzanne (June 24, 2016). "It's a Marvel in the making as Thor: Ragnarok's 'majestical' universe rises on Gold Coast". Gold Coast Bulletin. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2016.
 "Vision of Thor stunt emerges as Brisbane readies itself for filming". Nine News. August 18, 2016. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 18, 2016.
 Atfield, Cameron (August 21, 2016). "New York City comes to Brisbane ahead of Thor: Ragnarok shoot". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved August 21, 2016.
 Taika Waititi [@@TaikaWaititi] (July 9, 2016). "Javier Aguirresarobe is our DP" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016 – via Twitter.
 Flaño, Teresa (November 26, 2016). "Trabajar para Marvel me ha producido satisfacción y frustración". El Correo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on November 29, 2016. Retrieved November 29, 2016.
 Han, Angie (October 17, 2016). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Will Be the Most 'Out There' of the Marvel Movies, Teases Taika Waititi". /Film. Archived from the original on October 23, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2016.
 Steve "Frosty" Weintraub (October 28, 2017). Taika Waititi on Why the 'Thor: Ragnarok' Runtime Changed After Comic-Con. Collider. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Anderton, Ethan (July 23, 2016). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Footage: Hulk vs Thor, Surtur the Demon & More [Comic-Con 2016]". /Film. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
 Vejvoda, Jim (July 23, 2016). "Comic-Con 2016: Thor: Ragnarok Includes Surtur and Fenris". IGN. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
 "Up to 80 Gold Coast locals have now been sacked from the Thor: Ragnarok movie set". Gold Coast Bulletin. July 31, 2016. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
 Clarke, Allan (August 2, 2016). "The Director of the New Thor Movie Made Hiring Aboriginal People A Priority". Buzzfeed. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2016.
 Anderton, Ethan (September 7, 2017). "'Thor Ragnarok' Set Visit: Everything We Learned About the Cosmic Sequel – Page 3". /Film. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 Fischer, Sean (October 3, 2016). "Thor: Ragnarok Director Teases Planet Hulk Character". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 3, 2016. Retrieved October 3, 2016.
 McMillian, Graeme (October 27, 2016). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Director Confirms Key 'Planet Hulk' Character to Appear". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 29, 2016. Retrieved October 28, 2016.
 Perry, Spencer (October 27, 2016). "Thor: Ragnarok Wraps Filming, Director Taika Waititi Shares Video from Set". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on October 27, 2016. Retrieved October 27, 2016.
 Bell, Crystal (July 23, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Director Taika Waititi Says 'About 80 Percent' Of The Film Was Improvised". MTV. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 Dinh, Christine (January 5, 2017). "Get Your First Look at Marvel Studios' 'Thor: Ragnarok' In A New Photo". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on January 6, 2017. Retrieved January 5, 2017.
 Jayson, Jay (July 23, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Screenwriter Criticizes Marvel Over Credits". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 12, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2017.
 Arrant, Chris (September 13, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Co-Writer Said She's Not Getting Credit for Her Work". Newsarama. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017.
 Marvel Entertainment (September 28, 2017). Marvel Studios' Thor: Ragnarok – Behind the Scenes. YouTube. Event occurs at 1:28. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 Caldwell, Mary (June 29, 2017). "Now casting: Marvel's 'Thor: Ragnarok' needs fit men". Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on July 5, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2017.
 Leadbeater, Alex (July 22, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Has Finished Its Three Weeks Of Reshoots". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 Chitwood, Adam (July 27, 2017). "Tessa Thompson Says the 'Thor: Ragnarok' After-Credits Scenes Were Filmed During Reshoots". Collider. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved July 28, 2017.
 Fletcher, Rosie; Ashurst, Sam (October 20, 2017). "Exclusive: Thor: Ragnarok's post-credits sequence has an alternate version, says director Taika Waititi". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Sciretta, Peter (November 6, 2017). "Kevin Feige Answers Your Lingering 'Thor: Ragnarok' Spoiler Questions". /Film. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2017.
 Williams, Taylor (October 30, 2017). "Some Early Thor: Ragnarok Cuts 'Failed Miserably'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 30, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 "Thor: Ragnarok". Industrial Light & Magic. Archived from the original on February 24, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017.
 "Thor: Ragnarok – Day for Nite". Day For Nite. Archived from the original on February 24, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017.
 Seymour, Mike (November 20, 2017). "Building Character with Thor (part2)". FX Guide. Archived from the original on November 22, 2017. Retrieved November 22, 2017.
 Seymour, Mike (November 6, 2017). "Thor Ragnarok: Hela and back (Part 1)". FX Guide. Archived from the original on November 16, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2017.
 Gonzalez, Umberto (August 22, 2016). "'Thor: Ragnarok': Devo's Mark Mothersbaugh to Compose Score (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2016.
 Gettell, Oliver (August 22, 2016). "Devo's Mark Mothersbaugh to score Thor: Ragnarok". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 24, 2016.
 Stack, Tim (August 14, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok director wishes Freddie Mercury could have scored the film". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 15, 2017. Retrieved August 15, 2017.
 "'Thor: Ragnarok' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. October 19, 2017. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017.
 Couto, Anthony (July 23, 2016). "SDCC: 'Thor: Ragnarok' Props Confirm 'Planet Hulk' Elements". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved July 23, 2016.
 Romano, Nick (January 6, 2017). "Hilarious 'Team Thor' mockumentary is getting a Part 2". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2017.
 Couch, Aaron (August 28, 2016). "Watch the 'Thor' Mockumentary Showing What the Avenger Was Doing During 'Civil War'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016.
 Dinh, Christine (January 6, 2017). "Bring Home The Mystifying, Mind-Bending Journey Marvel Studios' 'Doctor Strange' On Digital HD Feb. 14 and Blu-Ray™ Feb. 28". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2017.
 Burlingame, Russ (March 28, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Footage and Concept Art Shown at CinemaCon". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved March 30, 2017.
 Schaefer, Sandy (April 10, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Teaser Trailer – Thor vs. Hulk". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 10, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2017.
 Gartenberg, Chaim (April 10, 2017). "Thor gets a new 'do in the first teaser trailer for Thor: Ragnarok". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 10, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2017.
 Arbeiter, Michael (April 10, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Teaser Trailer Looks Like Marvel's First True Adventure Epic". Nerdist. Archived from the original on April 10, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2017.
 Kit, Borys (April 11, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Trailer Is Marvel and Disney's Most Watched Ever in 24 Hours (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 11, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017.
 Solosi, Mary (July 23, 2017). "Cate Blanchett used YouTube videos to perfect her Thor: Ragnarok character". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 Strom, Marc (June 1, 2017). "Marvel Announces Epic Experiences For Fans at Disney's D23 Expo 2017". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2017.
 "SDCC 2017 – Thor: Ragnarok Costumes, Up Close". Newsarama. July 20, 2017. Archived from the original on July 21, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017.
 Anderton, Ethan (July 22, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Trailer: The God of Thunder Needs a Team to Battle Cate Blanchett [Comic-Con 2017]". /Film. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 Foutch, Haleigh (July 22, 2017). "New 'Thor: Ragnarok' Trailer Unleashes the Hulk on the God of Thunder". Collider. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
 Lussier, Germain (July 22, 2017). "Somehow the New Thor: Ragnarok Trailer Is Even Crazier Than the First". io9. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 Cuoto, Anthony (July 22, 2017). "New Thor: Ragnarok Poster Is Gloriously Colorful & Symmetrical". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 Goldberg, Matt (July 22, 2017). "New 'Thor: Ragnarok' and 'Black Panther' Posters Want a Place on Your Wall". Collider. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (July 24, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Leads Social Media Buzz Thanks to Comic-Con". Variety. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved July 25, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (July 31, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Tops Social Media Buzz for Second Consecutive Week". Variety. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved July 31, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (August 7, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Continues Social Media Buzz Streak for Third Consecutive Week". Variety. Archived from the original on August 10, 2017. Retrieved August 10, 2017.
 Carter, Justin (August 14, 2017). "Hulk Smashes in Brazilian Car Commercial". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 14, 2017. Retrieved August 14, 2017.
 Price, Stephen (August 14, 2017). "Hulk Hammers Rogue Satellite for Renault (Director's Cut)". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on April 12, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2017.
 "Marvel Studios' 'Thor: Ragnarok' Superpower of STEM Challenge" (Press release). Marvel Studios. September 11, 2017. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved November 8, 2017 – via PRNewswire.
 McNary, Dave (August 28, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Leads Movie Social Media Chatter With Help From Mayweather-McGregor Fight". Variety. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (October 2, 2017). "'Blade Runner 2049' Rave Reviews Bolster Social Media Buzz". Variety. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (October 16, 2017). "New 'Star Wars: The Last Jedi' Trailer Boosts Movie to Top Social Media Charts". Variety. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (October 23, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Creates Thunderous Buzz on Social Media Ahead of Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 Arrant, Chris (September 21, 2017). "Disneyland Hosting Thor: Ragnarok Sneak Peek One Month Before Release". Newsarama. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved September 22, 2017.
 Romano, Nick (November 3, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok cast perform the movie live for unsuspecting 4D audience". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 6, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok's Strong Sunday Bulks Marvel Pic To $122.7M Opening – Monday Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 3, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2017.
 "Coming up from the USA Today Network: College football rankings, 'Thor: Ragnarok' premiere and more". USA Today. October 9, 2017. Archived from the original on October 9, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017.
 Parker, Ryan; Couch, Aaron (October 10, 2017). "Mark Ruffalo Accidentally Streams a Portion of 'Thor: Ragnarok' by Instagram Mistake". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 11, 2017. Retrieved October 11, 2017.
 Simonot, Suzanne (September 26, 2017). "Chris Hemsworth to walk red carpet on Gold Coast for Thor: Ragnarok Australian premiere". Gold Coast Bulletin. Archived from the original on January 25, 2019. Retrieved January 25, 2019.
 Butler, Tom (August 29, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok release date brought forward in the UK". Yahoo! UK. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017.
 "Thor: Ragnarok – watch the first trailer for the Marvel superhero sequel". The Guardian. April 10, 2017. Archived from the original on April 11, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 31, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' To Hulk Smash Its Way To $400M Worldwide By Sunday – Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017.
 Trumbore, Dave (January 10, 2018). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Blu-ray Details, Trailer, Clips Herald the God of Thunder's Arrival". Collider. Archived from the original on January 11, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2018.
 Anderton, Ethan (February 23, 2018). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Deleted Scene Features a Cameo from Beyond the Grave". /Film. Archived from the original on February 24, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2018.
 Latchem, John (March 16, 2018). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Surges to Top DVD, Blu-ray Disc Sales Charts". Variety. Archived from the original on March 26, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018.
 Arnold, Thomas K. (March 22, 2018). "'Justice League' Storms to Top of DVD, Blu-ray Disc Sales Charts". Variety. Archived from the original on March 26, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018.
 Lawrence, Derek (September 7, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok voted most anticipated fall movie in Fandango survey". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (November 12, 2017). "Box Office: 'Thor: Ragnarok' Rules Worldwide, Tops $650 Million Mark". Variety. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. Retrieved November 13, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (November 12, 2017). "'Thor' Rocks $650M WW; 'Orient Express' Rolls $57M Offshore; 'Coco', 'Paddington 2' Feel Embrace – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. Retrieved November 13, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (December 10, 2017). "'Coco' Sweet With $390M Global, Scores China Hat Trick; 'Justice League' Tops $600M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. Retrieved December 11, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 20, 2018). "No. 8 'Thor: Ragnarok' Box Office Profits – 2017 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 12, 2017). "After 'Blade Runner 2049' Crashed, Leave It To 'Thor: Ragnarok' To Save Autumn B.O. With $100M+ Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 13, 2017. Retrieved October 13, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 26, 2017). "'Justice League' Hits Tracking With Super $110M–$120M Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 12, 2017). "'Daddy's Home 2' Gives Comedies A Lift; 'Orient Express' Attracts Adults in A 'Ragnarok'-Ruled Weekend – Sunday AM". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. Retrieved November 13, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 19, 2017). "'Justice League' Encounters Kryptonite at the B.O. With $96M Opening: Why The DC Movie Weakened – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 19, 2017. Retrieved November 19, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 26, 2017). "Thanksgiving B.O. At $268M, +3% Over 2016 Spurred By 'Coco' & Holdovers – Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 3, 2017). "'Coco' Looking at Sweet $26M+ As Specialty Sector Pops With Awards Contenders – Sunday Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017.
 "Long Range Forecast: 'Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle,' 'Pitch Perfect 3,' 'Downsizing,' & 'Father Figures'; Updated 'Justice League' Tracking". BoxOffice. October 27, 2017. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 10, 2017). "December Still Asleep Before 'Last Jedi' Awakens: 'Coco' $18M+, 'Disaster Artist' $6M+, 'Wonder' Crosses $100M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. Retrieved December 11, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 18, 2017). "'The Last Jedi' Opens To $220M & Will Send 2017 To $11B: How Disney Still Wins With 'Star Wars' Franchise – Monday Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 27, 2017. Retrieved December 26, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (October 31, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Thunders To $109M In Overseas Debut – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy; Busch, Anita (November 6, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' & Rolls To $431M WW, $308M Offshore With Record November China Start – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (November 28, 2017). "'Justice League' Tops $300M Overseas; 'Coco' Charms China & 'Thor' Rocks Near $800M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 "Thor: Ragnarok Reviews Suggest We've Reached Peak MCU". Rotten Tomatoes. October 19, 2018. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved February 8, 2018.
 "Thor: Ragnarok (2017)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2019.
 "Thor: Ragnarok Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 30, 2017. Retrieved January 10, 2018.
 Linden, Sheri (October 19, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved October 19, 2017.
 Duralde, Alonso (October 19, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Review: Cate Blanchett's Campy Villainess Steals the Thunder". TheWrap. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved October 19, 2017.
 Travers, Peter (October 25, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Review: Third Time's a Charm for the God of Thunder". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
 LaSalle, Mick (November 1, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' doesn't hammer all the fun out of a big movie". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2017.
 Roeper, Richard (November 3, 2017). "In fun 'Thor: Ragnarok,' action unfolds with a goofy 'Guardians' vibe". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2017.
 Seitz, Matt Zoller (October 30, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok Movie Review & Film Summary (2017)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2017.
 Chang, Justin (November 3, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' is punchy, predictable and fun in fits and starts". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 Collin, Robbie (October 19, 2017). "Thor: Ragnarok review: Marvel's exhilaratingly fresh nostalgia trip brings the thunder". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 4, 2017.
 Phillips, Michael (November 2, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' review: Marvel realm goes for the yuks". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 5, 2017.
 Debruge, Peter (October 19, 2017). "Film Review: 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 25, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2017.
 Zacharek, Stephanie (October 26, 2017). "Review: Thor: Ragnarok Is More an Approximation of Fun Than the Real Thing". Time. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 1, 2017.
 Dargis, Manohla (November 1, 2017). "Review: 'Thor: Ragnarok,' of Gods, Monsters and Silly Jokes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 2, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2017.
 Taipua, Dan (October 31, 2017). "Thor and his magic patu: notes on a very Māori Marvel movie". The Spinoff. Retrieved March 4, 2020.
 Adlakha, Siddhant (November 10, 2017). ""Thor: Ragnarok": Marvel From a Postcolonial Perspective". Village Voice. Retrieved March 4, 2020.
 Hunter, Jim (February 1, 2020). "What Thor: Ragnarok Is Really About". ScreenRant. Retrieved March 4, 2020.
 Han, Angie (November 9, 2017). "Asgard's bloody history refuses to stay buried in 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Mashable. Retrieved March 4, 2020.
 "The 2017 WAFCA Awards". Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association. December 7, 2017. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.
 "Golden Tomato Awards – Best of 2017". Rotten Tomatoes. January 3, 2017. Archived from the original on January 21, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2017.
 Nolfi, Joey (December 6, 2017). "The Shape of Water leads Critics' Choice Awards nominations". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.
 "NAACP Image Awards: 'Marshall,' 'Get Out,' 'Girls Trip' Dominate Film Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. November 20, 2017. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2017.
 "List of early winners at the NAACP Image Awards". CBS News. January 15, 2018. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2018.
 Giardina, Carolyn (January 16, 2018). "Visual Effects Society Awards: 'Apes,' 'Blade Runner 2049' Lead Feature Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2018.
 Tapley, Kristopher (January 10, 2018). "'Greatest Showman,' 'Young Pope,' 'Phantom Thread' Earn Costume Designers Guild Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2018.
 Travis, Ben (January 18, 2018). "Star Wars The Last Jedi and Thor Ragnarok Lead Empire Awards 2018 Nominations". Empire. Archived from the original on March 18, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018.
 Nordyke, Kimberly (May 3, 2018). "MTV Movie & TV Awards: 'Black Panther,' 'Stranger Things' Top Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 McNary, Dave (March 15, 2018). "'Black Panther,' 'Walking Dead' Rule Saturn Awards Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018.
 "2018 Hugo Awards". Hugo Award. Archived from the original on April 2, 2018. Retrieved April 2, 2018.
 "Teen Choice Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. August 12, 2018. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved August 12, 2018.
 "'Avengers: Infinity War' Leads HPA Awards Feature Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 27, 2018. Retrieved September 26, 2018.
 Davis, Eric (October 23, 2017). "Marvel Has Big Plans For Korg and Miek from 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Fandango. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017.
 Prudom, Laura (January 6, 2018). "Chris Hemsworth wants to do more Thor movies after Avengers 4". IGN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 7, 2018.
 Warner, Sam (February 9, 2018). "Thor's Chris Hemsworth says he's done with the character unless they can make a good script". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 10, 2018. Retrieved February 9, 2018.
 Butler, Tom (April 18, 2019). "Chris Hemsworth: I was exhausted and underwhelmed with Thor before 'Ragnarok' (exclusive)". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2019.
 Alexander, Bryan (January 10, 2018). "Chris Hemsworth visualized 'Thor 4' with director Taika Waititi on New Year's Eve". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 12, 2018. Retrieved January 11, 2018.
 Kelley, Sonaiya (April 17, 2019). "Tessa Thompson on Valkyrie's 'Avengers: Endgame' whereabouts and Captain Marvel shippers". The Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved April 18, 2019.
 Kit, Borys (July 16, 2019). "Taika Waititi to Direct 'Thor 4' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 16, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony; Ramos, Dino-Ray (July 20, 2019). "Natalie Portman Is Female Thor In 'Thor Love And Thunder' Opening Fall 2021 –Comic-Con". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Galuppo, Mia (July 20, 2019). "'Thor' Star Tessa Thompson Teases Valkyrie as Marvel's First LGBTQ Superhero". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 22, 2019.
 Romano, Nick (October 16, 2019). "Taika Waititi confirms Korg's glorious return for Thor: Love and Thunder". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 16, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2019.
 Sneider, Jeff (January 6, 2020). "Exclusive: Christian Bale in Talks to Join 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". Collider. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved January 6, 2019.
 Chitwood, Adam (March 6, 2020). "Christian Bale Is Playing the Villain in 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". Collider. Archived from the original on March 6, 2020. Retrieved March 6, 2020.
 Kroll, Justin (February 10, 2020). "'Thor' Sequel Writing Staff Recruits 'Someone Great's' Jennifer Kaytin Robinson (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 11, 2020. Retrieved February 11, 2020.
 Davis, Brandon (March 9, 2020). "Thor 4 to Feature the Guardians of the Galaxy". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020.
 McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (April 24, 2020). "'Spider-Man' Sequel Delays Release to November 2021 Amid Sony Date Shuffle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2020.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Thor: Ragnarok
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thor: Ragnarok.
Official website
Thor: Ragnarok on IMDb
Thor: Ragnarok
Video-x-generic.svgFilm portalFlag of the United States.svgUnited States portalDragon-149393.svgSpeculative fiction portal
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BNE: XX5775769 LCCN: no2017140077 VIAF: 4150999555529870528 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 4150999555529870528
Categories: 2017 filmsEnglish-language films2010s action adventure films2010s action comedy films2010s fantasy adventure films2010s superhero films2017 3D filmsAmerican 3D filmsAmerican action comedy filmsAmerican buddy filmsAmerican filmsAmerican science fiction adventure filmsAmerican sequel filmsAmerican sword and sorcery filmsApocalyptic filmsCrossover filmsDemons in filmFantasy action filmsFilms about extraterrestrial lifeFilms about gladiatorial combatFilms about royaltyFilms based on Norse mythologyFilms directed by Taika WaititiFilms scored by Mark MothersbaughFilms set in 2017Films set in 2018Films set in New York CityFilms set in NorwayFilms set on fictional planetsFilms shot in AtlantaFilms shot in BrisbaneFilms shot in New ZealandFilms using computer-generated imageryFilms with screenplays by Christopher YostHell in popular cultureIMAX filmsMarvel Cinematic Universe filmsMotion capture in filmSuperhero comedy filmsSuperhero films featuring female antagonistsThor (film series)Wormholes in fiction
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
Русский
中文
Español
Bahasa Indonesia
العربية
हिन्दी
Azərbaycanca
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
فارسی
44 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 11 July 2020, at 12:26 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Thor: The Dark World
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Thor The Dark World)
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Thor 2" redirects here. For the satellite of the same name, see Thor (satellite) § Thor 2.
Thor: The Dark World
Thor is holding his hammer while staring at something in the distance.
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Alan Taylor
Produced by	Kevin Feige
Screenplay by	
Christopher Yost
Christopher Markus
Stephen McFeely
Story by	
Don Payne
Robert Rodat
Based on	
Thor
by Stan Lee
Larry Lieber
Jack Kirby
Starring	
Chris Hemsworth
Natalie Portman
Tom Hiddleston
Anthony Hopkins
Stellan Skarsgård
Idris Elba
Christopher Eccleston
Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje
Kat Dennings
Ray Stevenson
Zachary Levi
Tadanobu Asano
Jaimie Alexander
Rene Russo
Music by	Brian Tyler
Cinematography	Kramer Morgenthau
Edited by	
Dan Lebental
Wyatt Smith
Production
company
Marvel Studios
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release date
October 22, 2013 (Leicester Square)
November 8, 2013 (United States)
Running time
112 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	$170 million[2]
Box office	$644.8 million[3]
Thor: The Dark World is a 2013 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Thor, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. It is the sequel to Thor (2011) and the eighth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was directed by Alan Taylor from a screenplay by Christopher Yost and the writing team of Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely. It stars Chris Hemsworth as Thor alongside Natalie Portman, Tom Hiddleston, Anthony Hopkins, Stellan Skarsgård, Idris Elba, Christopher Eccleston, Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, Kat Dennings, Ray Stevenson, Zachary Levi, Tadanobu Asano, Jaimie Alexander, and Rene Russo. In the film, Thor and Loki team up to save the Nine Realms from the Dark Elves.

Development of a sequel to Thor began in April 2011 when producer Kevin Feige announced plans for it to follow the MCU crossover film The Avengers (2012). In July, Thor director Kenneth Branagh withdrew from the sequel. Brian Kirk and Patty Jenkins were considered to replace him as director before Taylor was hired in January 2012. The supporting cast filled out in August 2012, with the hiring of Eccleston and Akinnuoye-Agbaje as the film's villains. Filming took place from September to December 2012 primarily in Surrey, England, as well as in Iceland and London. Taylor wanted the film to be more grounded than Thor, inspired by his work on Game of Thrones. He hired Carter Burwell to compose the score, but Marvel replaced Burwell with Brian Tyler.

Thor: The Dark World premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on October 22, 2013, and was released in the United States on November 8, as part of Phase Two of the MCU. The film received praise for its visual effects and performances (particularly those of Hemsworth and Hiddleston), but was criticized for its story, villain, and pacing. It was a commercial success, grossing over $644 million worldwide making it the tenth highest-grossing film of 2013. A third film, Thor: Ragnarok, was released in 2017, while a fourth film, Thor: Love and Thunder, is in development and scheduled for release in 2022.


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
3.1	Development
3.2	Pre-production
3.3	Filming
3.4	Post-production
4	Music
5	Marketing
6	Release
6.1	Theatrical
6.2	Home media
7	Reception
7.1	Box office
7.2	Critical response
7.3	Accolades
8	Sequels
8.1	Thor: Ragnarok
8.2	Thor: Love and Thunder
9	Notes
10	References
11	External links
Plot
Eons ago, Bor, father of Odin, clashes with the Dark Elf Malekith, who seeks to unleash a weapon known as the Aether on the nine realms. After conquering Malekith's forces, including enhanced warriors called the Kursed, on their home world of Svartalfheim, Bor safeguards the Aether within a stone column. Unknown to Bor, Malekith, his lieutenant Algrim and a handful of Dark Elves escape into suspended animation.

In present-day Asgard, Loki stands imprisoned for his war crimes on Earth.[N 1] Meanwhile, Thor, alongside warriors Fandral, Volstagg, and Sif, repel marauders on Vanaheim, home of their comrade Hogun; it is the final battle in a war to pacify the Nine Realms following the reconstruction of the Bifröst, the "Rainbow Bridge" between realms, which had been destroyed two years earlier.[N 2] The Asgardians soon learn that the Convergence, a rare alignment of the Nine Realms, is imminent; as the event approaches, portals linking the worlds appear at random.

In London, astrophysicist Dr. Jane Foster and her intern Darcy Lewis travel to an abandoned factory where such portals have appeared, disrupting the laws of physics around them. Separating from the group, Foster is teleported to another world, where she absorbs the Aether. Heimdall alerts Thor that Foster has moved beyond his near all-seeing vision, leading Thor to Earth. When Thor finds Foster, she inadvertently releases an unearthly force, and Thor returns with her to Asgard. Odin, recognizing the Aether, warns that the Aether will not only kill Foster but that its return heralds a catastrophic prophecy.

Malekith, awakened by the Aether's release, turns Algrim into a Kursed and attacks Asgard. During the battle, Malekith and Algrim search for Foster, sensing that she contains the Aether. Thor's mother Frigga is killed protecting Foster, and Malekith and Algrim are forced to flee without Foster. Despite Odin's orders not to leave Asgard, Thor reluctantly enlists the help of Loki, who knows of a secret portal to Svartalfheim, where they will use Foster to lure and confront Malekith, away from Asgard. In return, Thor promises Loki vengeance on Malekith for killing their mother. With Volstagg and Sif stalling Asgardian soldiers and Fandral assisting their escape, Thor, Loki, and Foster head to Svartalfheim.

There, Loki tricks Malekith into drawing the Aether out of Foster, but Thor's attempt to destroy the exposed substance fails. Malekith merges with the Aether and leaves in his ship as Loki is fatally wounded while killing Algrim. Thor, cradling Loki in his arms, promises to tell their father of his sacrifice. Afterward, Thor and Foster discover another portal in a nearby cave and reunite in London with Lewis and Foster's mentor Dr. Erik Selvig—who was briefly institutionalized due to the mental trauma he suffered during Loki's attack on Earth. They learn that Malekith plans to restore the Dark Elves to dominance by unleashing the Aether at the center of the Convergence in Greenwich. Thor battles Malekith through various portals and across multiple worlds until one portal separates them, leaving Malekith unopposed on Earth. Thor returns in time to help his mortal comrades use their scientific equipment to transport Malekith to Svartalfheim, where he is crushed by his own damaged ship.

Thor returns to Asgard, where he declines Odin's offer to take the throne and tells Odin of Loki's sacrifice. As he leaves, Odin's form transforms into Loki, who is alive and impersonating Odin.

In a mid-credits scene, Volstagg and Sif visit the Collector and entrust the Aether to his care, commenting that with the Tesseract already in Asgard, having two Infinity Stones so close together would be unwise. As they leave, the Collector states his desire to acquire the other five Stones. In a post-credits scene, Foster and Thor reunite on Earth, while somewhere in London, a frost monster from Jotunheim—accidentally transported to Earth during the final battle—continues to run amok.

Cast

The cast of Thor: The Dark World at the world premiere in London. Top to bottom: Hemsworth, Portman, Hiddleston, Elba, Eccleston, Akinnuoye-Agbaje, and Dennings (Scrollable image)
Chris Hemsworth as Thor: 
The crown prince of Asgard, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name.[5] Hemsworth stated that the film addresses unresolved issues regarding Thor's relationships from previous films, "For Thor and Jane, there are some unanswered questions now, since obviously he didn't stop in and catch up with her in The Avengers. Thor might have some explaining to do in this one. And with Loki, we get down to the major bones of our conflict with everything that's come from Thor to Avengers to now."[6] Hemsworth added, "Thor's journey I think picks more so up from where we left the first one—About to take on the throne... and now coming to the realization of what responsibility comes with that. Also, Alan [Taylor] keeps talking about the dark side of that responsibility, and the secrets of being king or becoming sort of very political about what people need to know and what they want to know."[7] Hemsworth especially enjoyed the role of Thor in this film as he was able to, "... break him down and find his human qualities and his vulnerable side."[8]
Natalie Portman as Jane Foster: 
An astrophysicist and Thor's love interest[9] who is brought from Earth to Asgard by Thor after she is infected with a mysterious energy.[10] Producer Kevin Feige said, "[W]hile Thor was a fish out of water on Earth in the first two films (Thor and The Avengers), this time Jane is very much a fish out of water in Asgard."[11] Portman added, "It was a whole different adventure this time. Because Jane is the fish out of water. I didn't want to make it like Bill & Ted, or like a valley girl dumped into Shakespeareland."[12] Portman also said the film finds Jane at a different place in her life, "Jane has moved, so she's now in London, not in Santa Fe anymore. Obviously she has gone through missing Thor and also being upset at him because he didn't come knock on her door when he was on her planet. She's definitely been getting over that and trying to move on."[13] Hemsworth's wife Elsa Pataky stood in for Portman during the post-credits kissing scene due to a scheduling conflict.[14]
Tom Hiddleston as Loki: 
Thor's adoptive brother and nemesis, based on the deity of the same name, who forms an uneasy alliance with Thor against the Dark Elves.[15][16][17] On where he wished to take the character in the film, Hiddleston said, "I'd like to take [Loki] to his absolute rock bottom. I'd like to see him yield, essentially, to his darkest instincts. Then, having hit rock bottom, maybe come back up. I think the fascination for me about playing Loki is that, in the history of the mythology and the comic books and the Scandinavian myths, is he's constantly dancing on this fault line of the dark side and redemption."[18] Hiddleston recalled, "When I met Alan [Taylor], he asked me how I thought I could do Loki again without repeating myself and I remembered talking with Kevin Feige when we were on the Avengers promotional tour. I said, 'OK, you've seen Thor and Loki be antagonistic for two films now. It would be amazing to see them fight side by side. I've been the bad guy now twice, so I can't be again, or otherwise I shouldn't be in the film. So we have to find a new role for me to play."[19]
Anthony Hopkins as Odin: 
The king of Asgard, father of Thor, and adoptive father of Loki, based on the deity of the same name,[20] who disapproves of Jane Foster being in Asgard.[10][11] Regarding Thor's relationship with his father, Hemsworth said, "[T]he conflict between Thor and Odin was so great in the first one... so, certainly they disagree as I think they always will at times but there's a far greater respect from each other. So it becomes, I guess, a more mature conversation, but there's more at stake this time, too. It's not sort of just their individual egos, the whole universe is at stake."[7] As to his approach Hopkins said, "I just play Odin like a human being, with maybe a little more dimension. I grow a beard, look hopefully impressive and keep it as real as possible."[13]
Stellan Skarsgård as Erik Selvig: 
Foster's mentor and colleague.[21] Skarsgård said, the film finds Selvig in a "disrupted mode" explaining, "Having a god in your head for a while creates some psychological problems", referring to the character's ordeal following The Avengers.[22]
Idris Elba as Heimdall: 
The all-seeing, all-hearing Asgardian sentry of the Bifröst Bridge, based on the mythological deity of the same name.[23] Elba said he has a larger role in the sequel, "In the new film we're going to get to know Heimdall the Asgardian a bit better, and we're going to get to know Asgard a bit better. I can't say too much, but the expansion of Thor in his world is going to be huge. My part was very small and functional in the first film".[24]
Christopher Eccleston as Malekith: 
The ruler of the Dark Elves of Svartalfheim.[25] About Malekith's motivation, Eccleston said, "There is a kind of tragic quality to his quest. Because he's lost his wife, he's lost his children. He's lost everything. And he returns for revenge. And the agent for his revenge is the Aether. If he gets hold of that, he is omnipotent."[26] Eccleston continued, "What I thought about a great deal was revenge—there's huge amounts of revenge. One quote is: 'When you seek revenge, be sure to dig two graves.' I did a film called Revengers Tragedy where I played a guy called Vindici—from the word 'vindictive'—and he is the distillation of revenge. So, in a way, that was what I had to think of: how revenge can make you absolutely monomaniacal—though you're still trying to make it recognizably motive-led. It's just the personification of movie evil."[19] However Taylor stated that many scenes involving Malekith's backstory had to be cut from the film to make it more efficient.[27] Eccleston revealed that he speaks an invented language for the film explaining, "The Elvish language is definitely based on European languages. I think there’s probably some Finnish in there. It does have its logic and its rhythms. It also has many syllables and it's very difficult to do while remaining naturalistic. It's been a particular challenge for us but hopefully it gives the film some complexity and variety."[13] Eccleston also said the role required six hours of make-up and 45 minutes in wardrobe.[26]
Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje as Algrim / Kurse: 
A Dark Elf and Malekith's trusted and loyal lieutenant who is transformed into a monstrous creature in order to destroy Thor.[28][29] Akinnuoye-Agbaje described Kurse as "an amalgamation of a bull and a lava-like creature. He has very animalistic tendencies but with this insatiable and unstoppable power. As an actor, that's one of the hardest things to embody. You have to realize you are probably the most powerful thing you could imagine. And you have to be that. You can't pretend, so that when you face Thor, it's real."[30] Akinnuoye-Agbaje stated the role required three hours of make-up a day and had to put on heavy duty prosthetics explaining, "The outfit weighed about 40 pounds. I'm sure there will be a certain amount of CGI but a good 80% was me in that suit."[30] About the character Akinnuoye-Agbaje said, "I suppose Algrim and Kurse would be the quintessential baddies, but in reality they are what I perceive as the scorn and the victims of the story. They are the elves who have basically lost their planet and their race to another race, the Asgardians. Here is a man/alien who places a noble objective beyond his own life and I think there is something extremely inspiring about that because he looks at the bigger picture and sees himself as a means to that end." Akinnuoye-Agbaje added, "I worked with director Alan Taylor in trying to maintain Algrim's humanity all the way throughout Kurse's transformation, so that even when you see Kurse the beast, you can still relate to him as being Algrim inside. And symbolically we did that by keeping the same piercing blue eyes throughout."[13]
Kat Dennings as Darcy Lewis: 
A political science major who is interning for Foster.[29][31] Her role in the film was expanded from the comic relief sidekick role she played in the first Thor film.[32] Dennings said her character is "really bad at real science in this first movie. In the second movie, she's more interested, but she still doesn't know anything about it. She loves Jane, she really wants Jane and Thor to be together. It's almost like her own little soap opera that she watches."[31]
Ray Stevenson as Volstagg: 
A member of the Warriors Three, a group of three Asgardian adventurers who are among Thor's closest comrades, known for both his hearty appetite and wide girth.[33] About the character Stevenson said, "He's got a heart the size of a planet that he wears on his sleeve, so he's like a big kid."[13] Regarding Volstagg's role in this film, Stevenson said, "Volstagg is struggling, he has a brood, they [the Warriors Three] are fighting for hearth and home as much as for the idea of Asgard itself. That's where he has trouble." Explaining, "He's all too aware of how potentially threatening this new enemy is on both the home front and the battlefield."[34]
Zachary Levi as Fandral: 
A member of the Warriors Three, characterized as an irrepressible swashbuckler and romantic.[35] Levi replaced Joshua Dallas in the role due to Dallas's commitment on Once Upon a Time. Levi had been up for the role in the first film, but bowed out due to his commitment on Chuck.[36] Levi compared the character to Flynn Rider, the character he played in the animated feature, Tangled, "Fandral is a little similar to Rider in some ways... He's like this Lothario. He's like Errol Flynn. He loves ladies, as do I".[37] Regarding the dynamic of the Warriors Three, Levi said, "The Warriors Three are here to support Thor. We are his confidants, his best friends. We've all grown up together in a lot of ways and fought many a battle together, escaped death. To me it's the way best friends ought to be—they're there when you need to talk and they're there if you don't want to talk, and they're there if you need to escape from your father's place in a flying skiff!"[13]
Tadanobu Asano as Hogun: A member of the Warriors Three, native of Vanaheim,[22] primarily identified by his grim demeanor.[38]
Jaimie Alexander as Sif: 
An Asgardian warrior, Thor's childhood friend and Jane Foster's romantic rival, based on the deity of the same name.[11][39] Alexander said there is more character development for Sif and the film explores the Sif-Thor relationship.[40] Alexander elaborated, "I really tried to bring a little bit more vulnerability in this film. Sif is very much in love with Thor and very much cares about his well-being. So she kicks a lot of butt in this movie but she also opens her heart a lot."[13] Alexander suffered a severe back injury while on the set. About the injury, she said, "It was raining, it was dark outside, it was like 5 in the morning—and I went down a metal staircase and slipped and slipped a disc in my thoracic spine and chipped 11 of my vertebrae. I knocked my left shoulder out of place and tore my rhomboid on my right side... It took me out of filming for a month".[41]
Rene Russo as Frigga: 
The wife of Odin, queen of Asgard, mother of Thor, and adoptive mother of Loki, based on the mythological deity of the same name.[42] Russo said that her role was expanded and explores Frigga's relationship with Loki, "You know, they cut me [down] in the first film. Kenneth Branagh sent me a nice note, because he understood, he's an actor. You move on, what are you going to do? But I think they're going to need a good mom in the next film. Loki needs his mom. I have a lot of compassion for [Loki]. But we might have to have a conversation about what he just did".[43]
Additionally, Alice Krige portrays Eir, an Asgardian physician,[44] while Talulah Riley plays an Asgardian nurse.[45] Chris O'Dowd was cast as Richard,[46][47] a suitor of Jane Foster's. Benicio del Toro, who plays the Collector in Marvel Studios' Guardians of the Galaxy, appears in a mid-credits scene with Ophelia Lovibond, who plays his aide Carina.[48][49][50][51] Jonathan Howard plays Ian Boothby,[52] Darcy's intern. Tony Curran plays Bor, Odin's father, based on the deity of the same name.[53][54] Clive Russell plays Tyr, based on the deity of the same name.[55] Richard Brake portrays a captain in the Einherjar.[55] Chris Evans makes an uncredited cameo appearance[56] as Loki masquerading as Captain America, while Thor co-creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance[57] as a patient in a mental ward.

Production

This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations for an encyclopedic entry. Please help improve the article by presenting facts as a neutrally worded summary with appropriate citations. Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote. (October 2019)
Development
"In both cases, it's using the conceit of a fantastical, alien world to make fresh what is really a domestic drama. In Game of Thrones, seeing Tyrion battle with his sister Cersei, seeing the relationships between children and their fathers... It's all the stuff we're interested in at a psychological level because we're living it all the time. But it takes place in this otherwise fantastical, foreign realm. I think the same thing is true in Thor. The brilliant thing Ken Branagh did in launching it was making it very much a story about two brothers, a story about brothers competing for the love of their father. So it's small, confined and human at the same time it's this blown-out, intergalactic world."
—Alan Taylor, director of Thor: The Dark World and several episodes of Game of Thrones[58]
In April 2011 before the release of Thor (2011), Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige stated that following The Avengers (2012), "Thor will go off into a new adventure."[59] Kenneth Branagh, director of Thor, responded to his comments, saying, "It is kind of news to me. Here's what I would say to that: It's that I'm thrilled they're that confident. I shall wait for the audience to tell us whether there should be a second one, and then if that's a nice conversation to be had [among] all of us, that'd be thrilling. But I've got too much Irish superstitious blood in me to assume that Thor 2 will happen. But if Marvel says so, then I guess it must be true".[60] Feige later explained that Marvel Studios would gauge how well Thor did at the box office before announcing sequels, but stated, "Don Payne is working on story ideas for a part two. We've got various options with Ken [Branagh] to discuss coming back, but right now the focus is on the first one. Don is, slowly but surely, thinking about where to take the character next should we be so lucky".[61]

In June 2011, Walt Disney Studios set a July 26, 2013, release date for the Thor sequel with Chris Hemsworth reprising his role as the title hero. It was also reported that Branagh would not be returning as director but would likely be involved in a producing capacity.[5] The Los Angeles Times cited the long commitment necessary for a special effects-heavy epic and the pressure to start the script process right away as reasons for Branagh's departure, although he was initially enthused by the chance to direct the sequel.[62] Branagh noted, "It was a long time [making the first film] and they were way too quick for me to get straight back into another, [but] it was a pleasurable experience and a film I'm very proud of."[63] The following day, Marvel formally hired Payne, one of the credited writers of the first film, to script the sequel.[64] In August, Brian Kirk entered early negotiations to direct the Thor sequel. The film would have marked Kirk's first time directing a big-budget motion picture, after having directed television series for HBO, Showtime and the BBC, including Game of Thrones.[65]

In September 2011, Tom Hiddleston confirmed he would return in the sequel, speculating that in the film, "[Loki will] have to take responsibility for what he's done".[15] Patty Jenkins, the director of Monster and the pilot episode of AMC's The Killing, entered early negotiations with Marvel Studios and Disney to direct the film, after Kirk had passed due to contractual sticking points that arose during negotiations.[66] Later in the month, Feige stated the sequel would "take Thor literally to other worlds" and would "primarily be the journey of that character, of he and Jane Foster and how the new dynamic with his father is working out, as well as what are the broader stakes for The Nine Worlds".[67] On October 13, 2011, Marvel confirmed that Jenkins would direct the sequel and Natalie Portman would return to star.[9] Disney also moved the release date for the film to November 15, 2013.[68]

Pre-production
"The main difference I have [from Branagh's approach] is really to do with look and tone. Things look really dirty. The first Thor was quite shiny and it was a very conscious, smart choice. When I came in, I wanted to get more of a sense of the Norse mythology: the Viking quality, the texture and weight of the history. He’s a superhero, but he’s been around for thousands of years. His dad is god!"
—Alan Taylor[19]
In December 2011, Jenkins exited the project, citing "creative differences".[69] She stated, "I have had a great time working at Marvel. We parted on very good terms, and I look forward to working with them again."[70] Jenkins felt she could not have made a good film "out of Thor 2 because I wasn't the right director... I could have made a great Thor if I could have done the story that I was wanting to do. But I don't think I was the right person to make a great Thor out of the story they wanted to do." Jenkins had intended to create a film based on the premise of Romeo and Juliet, where Jane was stuck on Earth with Thor forbidden to come save her. After Thor eventually does travel to Earth, he and Jane would have discovered that Malekith was "hiding the dark energy inside of Earth because he knows that Odin doesn't care about Earth, and so he's using Odin's disinterest in Earth to trick him."[71]

Three days later, it was reported that Marvel was looking at Alan Taylor and Daniel Minahan as prospective directors to replace Jenkins, and were also in the midst of hiring a writer to rewrite Don Payne's script, with the shortlist of possible writers consisting of John Collee, Robert Rodat, and Roger Avary.[72] At the end of the month, Alan Taylor, best known for directing episodes of the HBO fantasy series Game of Thrones, was chosen to direct the sequel.[73] Feige mentioned Taylor's work on the series Mad Men, Boardwalk Empire and Game of Thrones as reasons for his hiring, saying "With Alan's direction we got a few more layers of patina, of texture, of reality into our golden realm."[13] By January 10, Marvel Studios had commissioned screenwriter Rodat to rewrite the sequel and Hiddleston stated that filming was expected to begin in London in the summer of 2012.[74][75] Hemsworth later confirmed that filming was scheduled to begin in August.[76][77] Hemsworth also revealed that the film would have a more Viking-influenced feel, elaborating "I think the science fiction element to Thor … the danger is it falls a little bit into the world of it's 'tough to throw a light to.' I think of big waterfalls and mountains and a Viking influence, where the Norse mythology kind of grew from. Having that in Asgard is going to make it all the more special and that's what Alan [Taylor] wants to bring to it."[76] Feige said "while the relationship between Loki and Thor certainly has changed [after the events of the movie The Avengers] and has progressed, a lot of Thor 2 is picking up where it left off in terms of Jane, who you just saw for a moment on a computer monitor, and also what's been going on in the nine realms without the Asgardians being able to use the Bifrost." Feige also said that while Loki has a part, "there will be a different villain, another big villain".[77]

In May 2012, Mads Mikkelsen began talks to play one of the villains in the film and Anthony Hopkins, who played Odin in the first film, committed to returning in the sequel.[20][78] At the end of the month, Disney moved up the release date for the film a week ahead of the previous date to November 8, 2013.[79] By June 2012, much of the first film's supporting cast was confirmed to return, including Idris Elba,[23] Jaimie Alexander,[39] Ray Stevenson[33] and Stellan Skarsgård.[21] Also in June, Joshua Dallas announced that he would not be reprising the role of Fandral.[80] Dallas had initially intended to return,[81] but had to bow out due to his commitment on the television show, Once Upon a Time,[80] and Zachary Levi was cast in his place.[35] Levi was originally up for the role in the first film but scheduling conflicts with Chuck forced him to drop out.[36]

In July 2012, Mikkelsen stated he would not be appearing in the sequel due to prior commitments, "That's not happening unfortunately. I had a meeting with [the filmmakers], but it was a bit too late and then Hannibal came in...It's just not happening".[82] At the 2012 San Diego Comic-Con International, it was announced that the film would be titled Thor: The Dark World.[83] At the end of the month, residents near Bourne Wood in Surrey, England were notified that a film going by the working title, Thursday Mourning would be filming in the area.[84][85] In August of that year, Christopher Eccleston entered final negotiations to play Malekith,[25] and the film was scheduled to shoot in Iceland, where Taylor shot parts of Game of Thrones.[86] By August 22, Kat Dennings was hired to reprise her role as Darcy Lewis and Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje was cast as Algrim.[28][32] At the end of the month, film crews for Thursday Mourning began set construction at Stonehenge near Amesbury, England.[87]

Filming

Film set for Thor: The Dark World at Bourne Wood, Surrey, England
Principal photography began on September 10, 2012, in Bourne Wood, Surrey, England,[88] under the working title Thursday Mourning.[84][85] A few weeks later, Clive Russell was cast as Tyr, and Richard Brake was cast as an Einherjar captain.[55] At the end of the month, Jaimie Alexander was injured on the London film set, after she slipped while walking in the rain.[89] On October 12, 2012, production moved to Iceland with filming taking place in Dómadalur, Skógafoss, Fjaðrárgljúfur and Skeiðarársandur. Iceland Review described the shoot as being among the most extensive film projects to have ever taken place in Iceland.[90] The film's official synopsis was released, which revealed that Christopher Yost and Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely had also contributed to the screenplay.[91] Markus and McFeely said Feige had approached them in between writing drafts for Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014) to work on the Dark World script.[92] Three days later, Disney announced that the film would be released in 3D.[93] In late October, filming commenced at the Old Royal Naval College in Greenwich, London.[94] Filming also took place at Shepperton Studios and Longcross Studios in Surrey between October and December 2012.[13][95] Other filming locations included Wembley, Borough Market, Hayes and Stonehenge.[13] Alexander tweeted that principal photography wrapped on December 14, 2012.[96] In a 2013 report on film production costs for films from FilmL.A. Inc., indicated a gross budget of $170 million, with a UK tax offset of $17.3 million for Thor: The Dark World.[2] In 2016 Disney company accounts stated the budget spend was $237.6 million on Thor: The Dark World but $37 million of this was offset by payments from the UK tax authority.[97]

Kramer Morgenthau, who worked with Taylor on Game of Thrones, was brought in as the director of photography. Morgenthau said, "We wanted a grittier, boots-on-the-ground feeling, inspired by what Alan and I had done on Game of Thrones. We wanted the realms to feel grounded, like a real place, while at the same time respecting the magical 'planet of the Gods' feeling and theme." Thor: The Dark World was Morgenthau's first time shooting a feature film digitally. For the film, Morgenthau chose the Arri Alexa Plus, although he tested with the Sony F65 but found the Alexa to be more pleasing. In addition to the Alexa, Red Epic and Canon EOS 5D Mark II cameras were used for second unit filming. With the Alexa, Morgenthau used Panavision anamorphic lenses. Morgenthau said, "The lenses brought some of the magic and mystery of photochemical back to digital, that big-movie look." Morgenthau also stated that Thor: The Dark World was easily the most technically complex project that he has worked but said, "It's all the same concept and the same principles as in a smaller film. You just scale it up. You do a lot more prep. We had three months of prep and loads of time to pre-rig stages. Part of it is having a really good crew—it's definitely not a one-man show."[98]

Post-production

Taylor at the world premiere of Thor: The Dark World in London
In April 2013, McFeely said that "a lot" of writers had contributed to the film's script, and he and Markus were uncertain if they would receive final screenwriting credit on the film;[92] Markus and McFeely along with Yost received final screenwriting credit, with Payne and Rodat receiving story credit.[99] In July 2013, Dennings told reporters that the film was about to head into reshoots.[100] In August, Taylor said he shot extra scenes with Hiddleston and was about to shoot more with Hopkins. Taylor explained that it was all a part of the "Marvel process" saying, "We're doing full scenes, scenes that were not in the movie before. We're adding scenes, creating scenes, writing scenes for the first time. The one [involving Loki] was a fun connective scene... We realised how well Loki was working in the movie, and we wanted to do more with him. So it was that kind of thing, it was like, 'Oh, we could do this, we could jam this in here' because he's such a wonderful guy to watch do his stuff."[101] Also in August, IMAX Corporation and Marvel Entertainment announced that the film would be digitally re-mastered into the IMAX 3D format and released into IMAX 3D theaters internationally beginning October 30, 2013.[102]

Taylor said Marvel's The Avengers writer/director Joss Whedon rewrote several scenes in the film explaining, "Joss came in to save our lives a couple of times. We had a major scene that was not working on the page at all in London, and he basically got airlifted in, like a SWAT team or something. He came down, rewrote the scene, and before he got back to his plane I sort of grabbed him and said, 'And this scene and this scene?' And he rewrote two other scenes that I thought had problems."[103] In October 2013, Tony Curran tweeted that he would be portraying Odin's father, Bor, in a flashback sequence.[53][54] In November 2013, Feige stated that the film was intended to be the conclusion of the "Loki trilogy", which examined the relationship of Thor and Loki throughout Thor, The Avengers and this film.[104] The film's mid-credits scene was directed by James Gunn, the director of Marvel Studios' Guardians of the Galaxy.[48][105]


Photo of the Lofoten islands off the coast of Norway, taken in July 2008

The same islands used in the film with CG Asgardian structures added by Double Negative
The film's visual effects were completed by seven special effects studios, including Double Negative and Luma Pictures.[106] Blur Studio was the lead studio behind the film's prologue sequence taking place 5,000 years before the start of the film, on the Dark Elves homeworld of Svartalfheim. The sequence consisted mostly of computer graphics with live-action shots interwoven throughout. The use of CG allowed for greater freedom of movement by the characters as the live-action costumes were too constrictive.[107]

Taylor wanted Asgard in this film to have a more natural look than its predecessor. To achieve this, crews filmed the coast of Norway with an Arri Alexa camera for three days in a helicopter, capturing six hours of footage. Double Negative then embedded their CG rendering of Asgard on shots of the natural landscape. Double Negative visual effects supervisor Alex Wuttke said, "The benefit of that is that you have some real world terrain to work with – so you have buildings that have to convey natural features. Then from there we went in there populating the terrain with different buildings."[107] For scenes taking place on Svartalfheim, production filmed in Iceland with Double Negative adding ruins, mountains, Dark Elf ships, and skies.[107]

For the shot of the levitating truck, which was used in the film to demonstrate the strange phenomena brought on by the coming of the alignment of the worlds, filmmakers attached a cement truck to a large hydraulic rig, which could be programmed to change speed and movement.[107] In order to create Algrim's transformation into Kurse, Double Negative morphed live action performances of Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje as both Algrim and Kurse. Double Negative then added in smoke and lava-like effects.[107][infringing link?]

The film's climactic battle sequence takes place through the nine worlds by the use of portals. Visual effects supervisor Jake Morrison said, "We ended up calling this 'time toffee', so as you punch through from one realm to another it's almost like cling film or a slightly gelatinous membrane you have to pass through. It bends a little bit then rips and spits the person out. The other thing we wanted to do was to make sure it was quite fast from an editorial point of view. In the fight scenes there are times when Thor and Malekith are portaling all over the place, quite frankly. We made sure we always kept up the momentum and never stopped the fight. It was a way of making sure the audience weren't conscious there was an effect going on."[107]

Music
Main article: Thor: The Dark World (soundtrack)
In August 2012, Patrick Doyle said that he had discussions with the director about potentially returning to score the film.[108] By April 2013, Carter Burwell had been hired to compose the score,[109] but by the following month he left the film over creative differences.[110] In June 2013, Marvel hired Brian Tyler, who scored Iron Man 3, to replace Burwell.[111] Tyler said the previous film had an "attitude and [was] grounded in limitations" whereas the Thor film allowed for "all-out regal themes that could be as epic as I could make them." The composer described The Dark World as "science fiction meeting classic medieval war", leading to a score that drew from works of both genres such as Star Wars and The Lord of the Rings.[112] Azam Ali is a featured vocalist on the score.[113] The soundtrack was released digitally on October 28, 2013.[114]

Marketing

Hiddleston as Loki at the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con to promote the film
In March 2013, Marvel announced the release of a two-issue comic book prelude by writers Craig Kyle and Christopher Yost and artist Scot Eaton in June 2013.[115] In April 2013, Marvel released the first trailer for Thor: The Dark World. Forbes said, "This trailer fits nicely into that larger marketing push for Marvel's brand. It puts all of the recognizable characters from the first film front and center, presents the action as a team event reminiscent of the Avengers, and once again Loki—who was quite popular with audiences—makes an appearance."[116] The Los Angeles Times said, "Evident throughout the trailer is director Alan Taylor's influence; the Game of Thrones director's hand can be seen in the battle sequences, and Asgard—a bright and shiny kingdom under Thor director Kenneth Branagh—seems grittier in the sequel."[117] In July at the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con International, Hiddleston introduced footage from the film to audiences in character as Loki.[118] Also in July, Gameloft announced that a mobile video game titled, Thor the Dark World: The Official Game, would be released in conjunction with the release of the film in November.[119]

The theatrical poster for the film was released in early August 2013. Kirsten Acuna of Business Insider criticized the poster for its lack of originality, noting its similarities to one of the posters of Iron Man 3, both of which included the female lead clinging to the male lead, with both looking in opposite directions, antagonists prominently displayed in the background and supporting characters featured "on the side".[120] Additionally, Marvel released a second trailer for the film as part of YouTube's Geek Week.[121] Forbes said, "this 150-second trailer is basically just an extended version of last April's 106-second teaser" and that "this trailer fails to showcase what's new this time around... making audiences question if they really don't have much else to offer."[122] The Los Angeles Times said, that the trailer suggests "an ominous, epic scale for the sequel" and that "the collaboration between Thor and Loki promises to be especially interesting."[17] Later in the month, producer Kevin Feige and cast members Tom Hiddleston, Natalie Portman and Anthony Hopkins presented additional footage at Disney's D23 Expo.[123]

Also in August 2013, Disney announced plans to promote the film with an attraction at Disneyland.[124] The attraction called Thor: Treasures of Asgard, located next to the Stark Industries exhibit inside Innoventions in Tomorrowland, opened on November 1, 2013 and features displays of Asgardian relics and transports guests to Odin's throne room, where they are greeted by Thor.[125] The eighth episode of Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., titled "The Well", takes place in the aftermath of the events of Thor: The Dark World. It first aired on November 19, 2013.[126] Jaimie Alexander reprised her role as Sif in the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. episode "Yes Men", which aired on March 11, 2014.[127]

Release
Theatrical
The world premiere of Thor: The Dark World took place on October 22, 2013, at the Odeon Leicester Square in London.[128] The film was released theatrically in the UK eight days later, on October 30.[129] The film held its North American premiere at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood, and was released into U.S. theaters on November 7, 2013.[130] Thor: The Dark World is part of Phase Two of the MCU.[131]

Home media
Thor: The Dark World was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment for digital download on February 4, 2014, and on Blu-ray Disc and DVD on February 25, 2014. The physical media release includes deleted scenes, extended scenes, a gag reel, audio commentary by the cast and crew, and a Marvel One-Shot short film entitled All Hail the King,[132] featuring Ben Kingsley reprising his role as Trevor Slattery from Iron Man 3.[133]

The film was also collected in a 13-disc box set, titled "Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Two Collection", which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. It was released on December 8, 2015.[134]

Reception
Box office
Thor: The Dark World earned $206.4 million in North America and $438.4 million in other markets for a worldwide total of $644.8 million.[3] It surpassed the gross of its predecessor after just 19 days of its release.[135] Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $139.4 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film.[136]

Thor: The Dark World made an estimated $7.1 million in Thursday night showings, more than double the midnight gross of its predecessor.[137] On Friday, November 8, 2013, the film topped the box office with $31.9 million (including Thursday night earnings), which is 25% higher than the original film's opening-day gross.[138] Through Sunday, the film remained at the No. 1 spot with $85.7 million, which is a 30% increase over its predecessor's opening weekend.[139] This was the largest November opening for a film distributed by Disney, surpassing The Incredibles.[140] Thor: The Dark World topped the box office in North America during its first two weekends,[141] before being overtaken by The Hunger Games: Catching Fire in its third weekend.[142]

On its midweek opening day of Wednesday, October 30, 2013, Thor: The Dark World earned $8.2 million from 33 territories,[143] including the UK and France, where it opened higher than its predecessor.[144] During its first three days, the film earned $45.2 million,[145] and by the end of the weekend, after expanding into three more territories, it totaled $109.4 million over five days, finishing in first place in all 36 countries.[145] Its largest openings were recorded in China ($21.0 million), the UK, Ireland and Malta ($13.8 million) and France and the Maghreb region ($9.94 million). It topped the box office outside North America on its first three weekends of release.[141] In total earnings, its largest markets are China ($55.3 million), Russia and the CIS ($35.4 million) and the UK, Ireland and Malta ($31.4 million).[146]

Critical response
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 66% approval rating with an average score of 6.23/10, based on 275 reviews; the lowest rated film in the MCU. The website's consensus reads, "It may not be the finest film to come from the Marvel Universe, but Thor: The Dark World still offers plenty of the humor and high-stakes action that fans have come to expect."[147] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 54 out of 100 based on 44 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews".[148] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an "A−" average, based on a grading scale ranging from A+ to F.[139]

Ben Child of The Guardian said, "Thanks to Hiddleston and Hemsworth's impressive collective charisma, Thor: The Dark World is far from a franchise killer."[149] Justin Chang of Variety wrote, "This robust, impersonal visual-effects showpiece proves buoyant and unpretentious enough to offset its stew of otherwise derivative fantasy/action elements."[150] Alonso Duralde of The Wrap said, "Thor: The Dark World delivers the goods—action, otherworldly grandiosity, romance, humor—above and beyond its predecessor".[151] Simon Abrams, writing for RogerEbert.com said, "There's just enough tension and humor in Thor: The Dark World to make the film's otherwise listless proceedings worth watching, but only just."[152] Echoing other critics' sentiments, Frank Lovece of Film Journal International wrote, "Is it wrong that the best relationship in Thor: The Dark World is between the titular Norse-god superhero and his adoptive brother Loki? To take nothing away from Oscar-winner Natalie Portman, ... it's the complicated love-hate between Thor and the trickster god Loki that you can't turn your eyes from."[153]

Conversely, Tim Robey of The Daily Telegraph said, "It feels entirely made by committee—the definition of house style, without a personal stamp in sight."[154] Leslie Felperin of The Hollywood Reporter said, "Although director Alan Taylor manages to get things going properly for the final battle in London, the long stretches before that on Asgard and the other branches of Yggdrasil are a drag, like filler episodes of Game of Thrones but without the narrative complexity, mythical heft or all-pervading sexiness."[155] Michael Phillips of the Los Angeles Times described Thor: The Dark World as having the "same old threats of galaxy annihilation spiced with fairly entertaining fish-out-of-water jokes".[156] Jeannette Catsoulis of The New York Times said, "the battle scenes are as lacking in heat and coherence as the central love story".[157]

Accolades
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences placed Thor: The Dark World on its shortlist of potential nominees for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects but ultimately did not nominate it.[158]

Year	Award / Film Festival	Category	Recipient(s)	Result	Ref(s)
2014	IGN Best of 2013	Best Comic Book Adaptation Movie	Thor: The Dark World	Nominated	[159]
People's Choice Awards	Favorite Year-End Movie	Thor: The Dark World	Nominated	[160]
ABFF Hollywood Awards	Artist of the Year	Idris Elba (also for Pacific Rim and Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom)	Nominated	[161]
Empire Awards	Best Supporting Actor	Tom Hiddleston	Nominated	[162]
Saturn Awards	Best Comic-To-Film Motion Picture	Thor: The Dark World	Nominated	[163]
Best Supporting Actor	Tom Hiddleston	Nominated
Best Costume	Wendy Partridge	Nominated
Best Make-Up	Karen Cohen / David White / Elizabeth Yianni-Georgiou	Nominated
Best Special / Visual Effects	Jake Morrison / Paul Corbould / Mark Breakspear	Nominated
MTV Movie Awards	Best Shirtless Performance	Chris Hemsworth	Nominated	[164]
Best Hero	Nominated
Favorite Character	Loki	Nominated
Golden Trailer Awards	Best Action TV Spot	Thor: The Dark World	Nominated	[165]
BET Awards	Best Actor	Idris Elba (also for Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom)	Nominated	[166]
Teen Choice Awards	Choice Movie: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Thor: The Dark World	Nominated	[167]
Choice Movie Actor: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Chris Hemsworth	Nominated
Choice Movie Actress: Sci-Fi/Fantasy	Natalie Portman	Nominated
Sequels
Further information: List of Marvel Cinematic Universe films
Thor: Ragnarok
Main article: Thor: Ragnarok
Thor: Ragnarok was released on November 3, 2017,[168] directed by Taika Waititi.[169] Eric Pearson and Craig Kyle & Christopher Yost wrote the screenplay,[170] with Kevin Feige again producing.[171] Hemsworth, Hiddleston, Hopkins, Elba, Asano, Levi, and Stevenson reprise their roles as Thor, Loki, Odin, Heimdall, Hogun, Fandral, and Volstagg, respectively,[169][172][173][174][175] while Mark Ruffalo and Benedict Cumberbatch appear as Bruce Banner / Hulk and Doctor Strange respectively, reprising their roles from previous MCU films.[176][177] Cate Blanchett, Tessa Thompson, Jeff Goldblum and Karl Urban join the cast as Hela, Valkyrie, Grandmaster, and Skurge, respectively.[169]

Thor: Love and Thunder
A second sequel named Thor: Love and Thunder is scheduled to be released on February 11, 2022.[178] Both Hemsworth and Thompson will reprise their roles, with Natalie Portman returning after not appearing in Thor: Ragnarok.[179] Portman will portray her character taking on the mantle of Thor, similar to the comics.[180]

Notes
 As depicted in the 2012 film The Avengers. The events of Thor: The Dark World are set a year after the events of The Avengers.[4]
 As depicted in the 2011 film Thor.
References
 "Thor: The Dark World (12A)". British Board of Film Classification. October 16, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2013.
 2013 Feature Film Study (PDF) (Report). FilmL.A. Inc. p. 11. Retrieved January 2, 2017 – via The Hollywood Reporter.
 "Thor: The Dark World (2013)". Box Office Mojo (Amazon.com). Retrieved October 30, 2019.
 O'Hara, Helen (February 1, 2013). "New Thor: The Dark World Set Photo". Empire. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013. Retrieved February 1, 2013.
 Fleming, Mike (June 30, 2011). "Marvel And Disney Setting 'Thor 2' For Summer 2013; Chris Hemsworth's Back But Kenneth Branagh Won't Return". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved July 1, 2011.
 Horowitz, Josh (November 20, 2012). "Chris Hemsworth Marvels At 'Avengers' Success: 'We Pulled It Off!'". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2012.
 Keyes, Rob (August 6, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World' Set Interview With Chris Hemsworth". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2013.
 TheMovieNetwork (February 20, 2014). "Interview: Chris Hemsworth from 'Thor:The Dark World'". The Movie Network. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015.
 Fleming, Mike (October 13, 2011). "TOLDJA! Patty Jenkins Confirmed as 'Thor 2' Director". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 13, 2011. Retrieved October 13, 2011.
 Breznican, Anthony (August 10, 2013). "Marvel: D23 debuts new scenes for 'Thor' and 'Captain America' sequels". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 10, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
 Alexander, Bryan (April 22, 2013). "Exclusive look: Thor returns in 'The Dark World'". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2013.
 White, James (August 11, 2013). "Hiddleston And Portman on Thor: The Dark World". Empire. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2013.
 "Thor: The Dark World Production Notes" (PDF). Marvel Studios (via Business Insider). Archived (PDF) from the original on November 21, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013.
 Lee, Esther (December 3, 2013). "Natalie Portman: Chris Hemsworth's Wife Elsa Pataky Was My Stand-In For Kissing Scene in Thor: The Dark World". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013.
 Warner, Kara (September 1, 2011). "'Thor 2' Director Not Set Yet, Says Tom Hiddleston". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved September 19, 2011.
 Truitt, Brian (April 23, 2013). "Thor's world grows 'Dark' with new trailer". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
 McIntyre, Gina (August 7, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World' trailer puts Tom Hiddleston's Loki center stage". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2013.
 Sullivan, Kevin (May 2, 2012). "Tom Hiddleston Wants Loki At 'Absolute Rock Bottom' In 'Thor 2'". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2012.
 Crowther, Jane (November 2013). "Thor: The Dark World". Total Film (212): 66–71.
 Fleming, Mike (May 24, 2012). "Anthony Hopkins Up For 'Red 2' Villain; Can 'Thor' Sequel Dates Work?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2012.
 Pape, Stefan (June 28, 2012). "King of Devil's Island Interview – Stellan Skarsgård". HeyUGuys.co.uk. Archived from the original on June 28, 2012. Retrieved June 28, 2012.
 Jolin, Dan (August 7, 2013). "Thor: The Dark World Second Trailer Breakdown". Empire. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2013.
 Ghost Rider: Spirit of Vengeance – Idris Elba Interview (video). IGN. August 5, 2011. Event occurs at 0:35. Archived from the original on February 11, 2012. Retrieved September 19, 2011.
 Dibdin, Emma (August 30, 2012). "Idris Elba on his expanded role in 'Thor: The Dark World'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on August 30, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.
 Fleming, Mike (August 1, 2012). "We Have A 'Thor 2' Villain: Christopher Eccleston To Play Malekith The Accursed". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2012.
 Jolin, Dan (October 2013). "O Brother". Empire (292): 5/14.
 Bibbiani, William (November 7, 2013). "Exclusive Interview: Alan Taylor on Thor: The Dark World". Crave Online. Archived from the original on November 25, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
 McNary, Dave (August 22, 2012). "Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje joins 'Thor: Dark World'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 22, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2012.
 "'Thor: The Dark World' Character Descriptions (Minor Spoilers)". StitchKingdom.com. September 4, 2013. Archived from the original on September 17, 2013. Retrieved September 4, 2013.
 Lee, Chris (February 2, 2013). "Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje talks 'Thor' sequel, 'Bullet to the Head'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013. Retrieved February 2, 2013.
 Strauss, Bob (September 12, 2013). "While Marvel gets super cosmic in 'Thor' sequel, Kat Dennings brings it back to Earth". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on September 17, 2013. Retrieved September 12, 2013.
 Patten, Dominic (August 21, 2012). "'2 Broke Girls' Kat Dennings Back In 'Thor 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 22, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2012.
 Hibberd, James (April 24, 2012). "'Dexter' scoop: Ray Stevenson joins season 7 — Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 25, 2012. Retrieved April 25, 2012.
 Cheney, Alexandra (May 22, 2013). "How a Gay Gangster on 'Dexter' Inspired A Norse God in 'Thor'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on May 23, 2013. Retrieved May 22, 2013.
 Zachary Levi on Thor 2 (7/10/12). The Tonight Show with Jay Leno (video). July 10, 2012. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2012.
 Kit, Borys (June 8, 2012). "'Thor 2' Eyes 'Chuck' Star Zachary Levi (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 11, 2012. Retrieved June 9, 2012.
 Chuck Reunion Live from Nerd HQ 2012 (video). UStream. July 12, 2012. Event occurs at 34:15. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2012.
 Clark, Noelene (August 2, 2012). "'Thor: The Dark World': Christopher Eccleston is villain Malekith". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 22, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2012.
 Wigler, Josh (January 11, 2012). "Jamie Alexander Teases 'Thor 2' Romance, Possible 'Avengers' Appearance". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 "Exclusive Video: Jaimie Alexander Talks 'Thor: The Dark World'". I Am Rogue. January 5, 2013. Archived from the original on January 7, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. There is more [character development] with Sif. We sort of explore the Thor-Sif relationship a little bit; kind of [in a romantic way]. It's more like getting a feel of who these people are, how the way they are with each other.
 "Slip fells action heroine". New York Post. November 18, 2012. Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
 Malkin, Marc (March 21, 2011). "Thor's Chris Hemsworth: "He's Huge", Gushes Costar". E!. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2012.
 Vineyard, Jennifer (July 31, 2012). "Rene Russo Wants to Brush Up on Her Comic-Book History Before Thor 2". New York. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2012.
 Keyes, Rob (November 2013). "Thor 2 The Dark World Official Still Photo Asgardian Screens". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2013.
 Griffiths, E (October 29, 2018). "10 Marvel stars you'd forgotten were in Doctor Who". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019.
 Lukenbill, Mark (March 19, 2013). "Interview: Chris O'Dowd on Shooting 'The Sapphires' in Vietnam and Taking a Role in 'Thor 2' for Fun". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2013.
 Reynolds, Simon (October 9, 2013). "Chris O'Dowd in 'Thor: The Dark World' - first look pictures". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2013.
 Sullivan, Kevin P (November 6, 2013). "'Guardians of the Galaxy': Latest on Vin, Bradley and the Scene Everyone's Talking About". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013.
 "Marvel Studios Begins Production on Guardians of the Galaxy". Marvel.com. July 20, 2013. Archived from the original on July 21, 2013. Retrieved July 20, 2013.
 Lovece, Frank (November 6, 2013). "Film Review: Thor: The Dark World". Film Journal International. Archived from the original on March 10, 2014. Retrieved March 10, 2014.
 Sunu, Steve (April 28, 2014). "Comic Reel: "Justice League" Movie Confirmed; New Look At "Guardians of the Galaxy's" Nebula". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014.
 Fortune, Ed (November 7, 2013). "Interview: Jonathan Howard Thor: The Dark World". Starburst. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 18, 2013.
 Curran, Tony (October 11, 2013). "guess who's playing Odin's Father?". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
 Curran, Tony (October 11, 2013). "To young indeed to play Odin's Papa but in flashback tells of days gone bye..." Twitter. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
 Patten, Dominic (September 24, 2012). "'Thor: The Dark World' Adds Pair To Cast". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 24, 2012. Retrieved September 24, 2012.
 Sullivan, Kevin P (November 7, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World': You Won't Believe The Story Behind The Cameo". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 10, 2014. Retrieved November 9, 2013.
 "NTF Scoop – Stan Lee Confirms Cameo in "Thor: The Dark World"". NukeThe Fridge.com. September 15, 2012. Archived from the original on September 17, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012.
 'Thor: The Dark World' - Alan Taylor Interview - D23 2013 (video). IGN. August 12, 2013. Event occurs at 0:25. Retrieved August 12, 2013.
 Vejvoda, Jim (April 19, 2011). "Marvel: What's Next After Avengers?". IGN. Archived from the original on April 23, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2011.
 VanAirsdale, S.T. (April 27, 2011). "Imminent Thor Sequel is News to Kenneth Branagh". Movieline. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved May 19, 2011.
 Yamato, Jen (May 1, 2011). "Chris Hemsworth and Co. on Avengers Ego-Clashing and Thor Sequel Plans". Movieline. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved May 19, 2011.
 Boucher, Geoff (July 27, 2011). "Thor 2: Chris Hemsworth sad to see Kenneth Branagh go". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved July 28, 2011.
 Galloway, Stephen (March 1, 2015). "'Cinderella' Director Kenneth Branagh on Casting His Princess, Working With Marvel and His Dream Shakespeare Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 2, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
 Fleming, Mike (July 1, 2011). "'Thor 2' To Be Scripted By Don Payne". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved July 1, 2011.
 Graser, Marc; Kroll, Justin (August 4, 2011). "Brian Kirk in talks to direct 'Thor 2'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 5, 2011.
 Graser, Marc; Kroll, Justin (September 22, 2011). "Jenkins in talks to helm 'Thor 2'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 22, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2011.
 Breznican, Anthony (September 22, 2011). "'Monster' director Patty Jenkins considered for 'Thor 2'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011. Retrieved September 26, 2011.
 Masters, Kim (October 13, 2011). "Official: Disney's 'Lone Ranger' Sets May 31, 2013 Release Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 13, 2011. Retrieved October 13, 2011.
 Fleming, Mike (December 6, 2011). "Director Patty Jenkins Exits Marvel's 'Thor 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 7, 2011. Retrieved December 7, 2011.
 Kit, Borys (December 6, 2011). "'Thor 2' Director Patty Jenkins Exits". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2011. Retrieved December 7, 2011.
 Cheng, Susan (May 25, 2017). "Why Director Patty Jenkins Left Marvel's "Thor 2"". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Kit, Borys; Masters, Kim (December 9, 2011). "'Thor 2' Closing in on New Director and Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 26, 2011. Retrieved December 10, 2011.
 Belloni, Matthew (December 24, 2011). "'Game of Thrones' Director Alan Taylor Chosen for 'Thor 2'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 26, 2011. Retrieved December 26, 2011.
 Fleming, Mike (January 10, 2012). "Robert Rodat To Rewrite 'Thor 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 Gordon, Jeremy (January 10, 2012). "Loki Will Keep People Guessing In 'Thor 2', Says Tom Hiddleston". Empire via MTV News. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 Lussier, Germain (April 13, 2012). "Chris Hemsworth Talks The New Asgard Of 'Thor 2'". /Film. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2012.
 Weintraub, Steve (April 12, 2012). "Kevin Feige Talks 'Thor 2', 'Captain America 2', 'Iron Man 3', the 'Avengers' Sequel, 2014 and 2015 Releases, Another 'Hulk' Sequel, and a Lot More!". Collider.com. Archived from the original on April 13, 2012.
 Knoll, Justin; Graser, Marc (May 24, 2012). "Mikkelsen in talks for 'Thor 2' villain role". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2012.
 McNary, Dave (May 31, 2012). "'Lone Ranger' to get July 2013 release". Variety. Archived from the original on June 1, 2012. Retrieved June 1, 2012.
 Rice, Lynette (June 8, 2012). "'Thor' scoop: Josh Dallas won't reprise role as Fandral -- Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 11, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012.
 Goldman, Eric (October 4, 2011). "Josh Dallas Talks Thor 2". IGN. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved October 4, 2011.
 Hannibal weerhoudt Mads Mikkelsen van Thor 2. Zoomin.TV (video). July 12, 2012. Event occurs at 0:20. Archived from the original on April 18, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2012.
 Vejvoda, Jim (July 14, 2012). "Comic-Con: Thor 2 Title Buzz and Ant-Man Footage". IGN. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2012.
 "Proposed Film Shoot in Bourne Wood September 2012". SurreyCommunity.info. July 3, 2012. Archived from the original on August 24, 2012. Retrieved August 24, 2012.
 Dietsch, TJ (July 30, 2012). "Thor: The Dark World Filming in UK As 'Thursday Mourning'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 24, 2012. Retrieved August 24, 2012.
 Þórarinsson, Þórarinn (August 3, 2012). "Thor 2 verður tekin upp á Íslandi" [Thor 2 will be shot in Iceland] (in Icelandic). Svarthofdi. Archived from the original on August 3, 2012. Retrieved August 3, 2012. …en samkvæmt traustum heimildum Svarthöfða stendur til að taka ofurhetjumyndina Thor: The Dark World upp á Íslandi. / … according to reliable sources ... the superhero movie Thor: The Dark World [will shoot] in Iceland.
 Blake, Morwenna (August 29, 2012). "Film being shot at Stonehenge". Salisbury Journal. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved September 4, 2012.
 "Thor 2: The Dark World starts shooting battle scenes in Surrey". Metro. September 11, 2012. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2019.
 Doty, Meriah (September 25, 2012). "'Thor' star's scary on-set injury". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on September 26, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2012.
 "Chris Hemsworth Arrives to Shoot 'Thor' in Iceland". Iceland Review. October 12, 2012. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2012.
 Chitwood, Adam (October 12, 2012). "Official Synopsis for Thor: The Dark World Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2020.
 Lussier, Germain (April 12, 2013). "'Captain America: The Winter Soldier' Sets Up Allegiances For 'The Avengers 2'". /Film. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved April 13, 2020.
 Goldberg, Matt (October 15, 2012). "'Ant-Man' Set for November 6, 2015; 'Iron Man 3' and 'Thor: The Dark World' Confirmed for 3D; Disney Announces More Release Dates and Changes". Collider.com. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2012.
 "Photos from the Thor 2 filming in Greenwich". Greenwich, England: Greenwich.co.uk. October 22, 2012. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
 Wiseman, Andreas (November 11, 2015). "'Doctor Strange' shoot underway in UK with Benedict Cumberbatch". Screen Daily. Retrieved November 14, 2015.
 Alexander, Jaimie (December 14, 2012). "Heading back to Los Angeles after wrapping up on THOR 2 :) farewell Asgard, I will miss you xo". Twitter. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2012.
 Groves, Don (February 1, 2016). "Hollywood Studios Reap Hundreds of Millions in British Tax Relief". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Heuring, David (October 22, 2013). "Hammer Time". HD Video Pro. Archived from the original on November 21, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013.
 Sneider, Jeff (January 29, 2014). "Marvel Hires One of Its Own Executives to Co-Write 'Thor 3'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 30, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014.
 Cornet, Roth (July 30, 2013). "Kat Dennings: Thor: the Dark World Heads Into Reshoots". IGN. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2013.
 Weintraub, Steve 'Frosty' (August 11, 2013). "Director Alan Taylor Talks 'Thor: The Dark World', How They're Still Shooting New Scenes, Trying to Find the Right Tone, and More at D23". Collider.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2013.
 "'Thor: The Dark World' Gets IMAX Release". Deadline Hollywood. August 15, 2013. Archived from the original on August 15, 2013. Retrieved August 15, 2013.
 McCabe, Joesph (November 2013). "Thor: The Dark World". SFX (240): 47.
 Lussier, Germain (November 13, 2013). "/Film Interview: 'Thor: The Dark World' Producer Kevin Feige". /Film. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved November 16, 2013.
 Suskind, Alex (November 8, 2013). "What Did Thor 2's Post-Credits Scene Mean?". Vulture. New York. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2015.
 "Upcoming Effects Films: Thor: The Dark World". Cinefex. July 24, 2013. Archived from the original on June 1, 2012. Retrieved August 19, 2013.
 Failes, Ian (November 18, 2013). "The dark side: behind the VFX of Thor: The Dark World". FX Guide. Archived from the original on November 19, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013.
 "ScoreKeeper Chats All Things Scottish with 'Brave' Composer Patrick Doyle!!". Ain't It Cool News. August 29, 2012. Archived from the original on August 30, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.
 "Carter Burwell to Score 'Thor: The Dark World'". Film Music Reporter. April 19, 2013. Archived from the original on April 23, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
 Yamato, Jen (May 28, 2013). "Composer Carter Burwell Departs Marvel's 'Thor: The Dark World'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 "Brian Tyler to Score 'Thor: The Dark World'". Film Music Reporter. June 18, 2013. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013.
 "10 Questions With Brian Tyler". Broadcast Music, Inc. December 20, 2013. Archived from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2014.
 Ali, Azam (September 6, 2013). "Now that it's all done..." Facebook. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved September 7, 2013.
 "'Thor: The Dark World' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. October 18, 2013. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved October 18, 2013.
 "Marvel Comics Solicitations for June, 2013". Comic Book Resources. March 13, 2013. Archived from the original on March 13, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2013.
 Hughes, Mark (April 23, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World' Trailer Released, Fuels Marvel Marketing Machine". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013.
 Clark, Noelene (April 23, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World' trailer: Marvel meets 'Game of Thrones'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013.
 McIntyre, Gina (July 21, 2013). "Comic-Con: Tom Hiddleston talks 'top-secret' Loki Marvel panel stunt". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013.
 "Gameloft Announces the New Marvel's Thor: The Dark World - The Official Game". PR Newswire. July 22, 2013. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2013.
 Acuna, Kristen (August 5, 2013). "The New 'Thor: The Dark World' Poster Looks Exactly Like The One For 'Iron Man 3'". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2015.
 "New Thor Trailer to Debut During YouTube's Geek Week". Marvel.com. July 30, 2013. Archived from the original on September 19, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2013.
 Mendelson, Scott (August 7, 2013). "Trailer Talk: 'Thor: The Dark World' And The Unnecessary Second Trailer". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2013.
 Ford, Rebecca (August 10, 2013). "D23: Disney Brings Out Angelina Jolie for 'Maleficent,' Screens New Footage of 'Saving Mr. Banks'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 13, 2013. Retrieved August 13, 2013.
 Graser, Marc (August 20, 2013). "Thor Is Headed to Disneyland". Variety. Archived from the original on August 20, 2013. Retrieved August 20, 2013.
 Lesnick, Silas (October 25, 2013). "CS Explores Disneyland's Thor: The Dark World Attraction, Treasures of Asgard". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2013.
 "Declassifying Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Well". Marvel.com. November 1, 2013. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 "First Look: Thor Star Jaimie Alexander Meets the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." TV Guide. February 10, 2014. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014.
 Mercedes Lara, Maria (October 22, 2013). "Natalie and Tom Make A Hot Thor 2 Pair". PopSugar. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2013.
 West, Michael (October 24, 2013). "Thor 2: The Dark World Scores 83%: Where Does It Rank in Marvel's Oeuvre?". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2013.
 Milly, Jenna (November 5, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World' premieres in Hollywood to screaming crowd". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 5, 2013.
 Trumbore, Dave (May 1, 2018). "MCU Timeline Explained: From Infinity Stones to Infinity War and Beyond". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
 Venable, Nick (January 2, 2014). "Thor: The Dark World Hammers Home A Packed Blu-ray Set This February". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on January 4, 2014. Retrieved January 4, 2014.
 Breznican, Anthony (January 9, 2014). "Marvel One-Shot: First Look at Ben Kingsley's Mandarin encore in 'All Hail the King' short film — Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved January 9, 2014.
 Goldberg, Matt (October 23, 2015). "'Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Two Collection' Unveiled; Contains First Look at Phase 3". Collider. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015.
 "Global: 'Thor: The Dark World' Outgrosses Original In 19 Days". BoxOffice.com. November 17, 2013. Archived from the original on November 21, 2013.
 Fleming Jr, Mike (March 21, 2014). "2013 Most Valuable Blockbuster – No. 7 'Monsters University' Vs. No. 10 'Thor: The Dark World'; #2 'Frozen' Vs. #15 'The Great Gatsby'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 23, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015.
 "'Thor: The Dark World' Roars to $7.1M at Thursday Box Office". The Wrap. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 9, 2013.
 "Box office update: 'Thor: The Dark World' tops Friday with $31.6 million". Entertainment Weekly. November 9, 2013. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 9, 2013.
 Subers, Ray (November 10, 2013). "Weekend Report: 'Thor' Sequel Gets Boost from 'The Avengers'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
 Herndon, Jessica (November 10, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World' Bashes Box Office With $86M". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
 Subers, Ray (November 17, 2013). "Weekend Report: 'Best Man' Surprises, But 'Thor' Still Repeats". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 17, 2013.
 "Weekend Report: 'Catching Fire' Burns Bright, Sets November Record". Box Office Mojo. November 24, 2013. Archived from the original on November 25, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
 Kay, Jeremy (October 31, 2013). "Thor 2 flies to $8.2m int'l start". ScreenDaily.com. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 Finke, Nikki (October 31, 2013). "'Thor 2' Begins International Rollout: Stronger Starts In UK & France Than First". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved October 31, 2013.
 McClintock, Pamela (November 3, 2013). "Box Office: 'Thor: The Dark World' Opens to Huge $109.4 Million Overseas". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2013.
 "Thor: The Dark World (2013) - International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2013.
 Thor: The Dark World at Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved July 10, 2020.
 Thor: The Dark World at Metacritic. CBS Interactive.
 Child, Ben (October 23, 2013). "Thor: The Dark World – first look review". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2013.
 Chang, Justin (October 23, 2013). "Film Review: 'Thor: The Dark World'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2013.
 Duralde, Alonso (October 23, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World' Review: A Stirring, If Not Mighty, Return for the Thunder God". The Wrap. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2013.
 Abrams, Simon (November 8, 2013). "'Thor: The Dark World'". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013.
 Lovece, Frank (November 8, 2013). "Film Review: 'Thor: The Dark World'". Film Journal International. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
 Robey, Tim (October 23, 2013). "Thor: The Dark World, review". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2013.
 Felperin, Leslie (November 5, 2013). "Thor: The Dark World Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 6, 2013. Retrieved November 5, 2013.
 Phillips, Michael (November 6, 2013). "Review: 'Thor: The Dark World' hammered by repetition". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013.
 Catsoulis, Jeannette (November 7, 2013). "The Hammer Resurgent". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013.
 "10 Contenders Remain in VFX Oscar® Race". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. December 5, 2013. Archived from the original on December 10, 2013. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 "Best Comic Book Adaptation Movie". IGN. Archived from the original on December 23, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2013.
 Hayner, Chris E. (January 8, 2014). "People's Choice Awards 2014 - Full winners list". Zap2It. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2014.
 "2014 ABFF Hollywood Awards Nominees Announced". PR Newswire. January 8, 2014. Archived from the original on February 10, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014.
 "The Hobbit on a quest for Empire Awards". BBC News. February 24, 2014. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved February 28, 2014.
 Johns, Nikara (February 25, 2014). "'Gravity,' 'The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug' Lead Saturn Awards Noms". Variety. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved February 28, 2014.
 "2014 MTV Movie Awards: Full Nominations List". MTV News. March 6, 2014. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved March 6, 2014.
 "The 15th Annual Golden Trailer Award Nominees". Golden Trailer Awards. May 7, 2014. Archived from the original on July 11, 2014. Retrieved June 11, 2014.
 "Best Actor". BET. May 14, 2014. Archived from the original on July 11, 2014. Retrieved June 11, 2014.
 "Teen Choice Awards 2014 Nominees Revealed!". Yahoo! Movies. June 18, 2014. Archived from the original on June 17, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2014.
 Strom, Marc (February 10, 2015). "Marvel Studios Schedules New Release Dates for 4 Films". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2015.
 Strom, Marc (May 20, 2016). "Marvel Studios Confirms Stellar New Cast Members of the Highly Anticipated 'Thor: Ragnarok'". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2016.
 Keyes, Rob (October 16, 2017). "Why Isn't Lady Sif in Thor: Ragnarok?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved October 16, 2017.
 Sneider, Jeff (January 29, 2014). "Marvel Hires One of Its Own Executives to Co-Write 'Thor 3'". The Wrap. Archived from the original on January 30, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014.
 Strom, Marc (October 28, 2014). "Thor Brings Ragnarok to the Marvel Cinematic Universe in 2017". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Breznican, Anthony (October 28, 2014). "Marvel Studios reveals Phase Three slate, including two-part 'Avengers' threequel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
 Arvedon, Jon (September 27, 2017). "New Thor: Ragnarok Image Confirms Return of Another Asgardian". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 28, 2017. Retrieved September 27, 2017.
 "Thor: Ragnarok Press Kit" (PDF). Walt Disney Studios. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017.
 Blickley, Leigh (October 23, 2015). "Mark Ruffalo Wants To See Bruce Banner And Hulk Face-Off on Screen". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2015.
 Breznican, Anthony (November 5, 2016). "Doctor Strange revelations: Secrets and Easter eggs from the new Marvel movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016.
 McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (April 24, 2020). "'Spider-Man' Sequel Delays Release to November 2021 Amid Sony Date Shuffle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2020.
 Kit, Borys (July 16, 2019). "Taika Waititi to Direct 'Thor 4' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2019.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony; Ramos, Dino-Ray (July 20, 2019). "Natalie Portman Is Female Thor In 'Thor Love And Thunder' Opening Fall 2021 –Comic-Con". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thor: The Dark World.
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Thor: The Dark World
Official website
Thor: The Dark World on IMDb
Thor: The Dark World at AllMovie
Thor: The Dark World at Rotten Tomatoes
Thor: The Dark World
Video-x-generic.svgFilm portalFlag of the United States.svgUnited States portalDragon-149393.svgSpeculative fiction portal
Categories: 2013 filmsEnglish-language films2010s action adventure films2010s fantasy adventure films2010s superhero films2013 3D filmsAmerican 3D filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican filmsAmerican sequel filmsFantasy action filmsFiction about regicideFictional-language filmsFilms about extraterrestrial lifeFilms about royaltyFilms based on Norse mythologyFilms directed by Alan TaylorFilms scored by Brian TylerFilms set in 2013Films set in LondonFilms set in WiltshireFilms shot at Longcross StudiosFilms shot at Shepperton StudiosFilms shot in IcelandFilms shot in LondonFilms shot in SurreyFilms using computer-generated imageryFilms with screenplays by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeelyFilms with screenplays by Christopher YostFilms with screenplays by Don PayneIMAX filmsMarvel Cinematic Universe filmsMotion capture in filmThor (film series)Wormholes in fiction
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
Русский
Español
العربية
فارسی
中文
Bahasa Indonesia
Bahasa Melayu
हिन्दी
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
41 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 15 July 2020, at 19:16 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki
